1
Drowsiness Detection Based On Driver Temporal
Behavior Using a New Developed Dataset
F. Faraji, F. Lotﬁ, J. Khorramdel, A. Najaﬁ, A. Ghaffari
K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.
Email: farnooshfaraji@email.kntu.ac.ir
Abstract—Driver drowsiness detection has been the subject of
many researches in the past few decades and various methods
have been developed to detect it. In this study, as an image
based approach with adequate accuracy, along with expedite
process, we applied YOLOv3 (You Look Only Once-version3)
CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) for extracting facial fea-
tures automatically. Then, LSTM (Long-Short Term Memory)
neural network is employed to learn driver temporal behaviors
including yawning and blinking time period as well as sequence
classiﬁcation. To train YOLOv3, we utilized our collected dataset
alongside transfer learning method. Moreover, the dataset for
LSTM training process is produced by the mentioned CNN and
is formatted as a two-dimensional sequence comprised of eye
blinking and yawning time durations. The developed dataset
considers both disturbances such as illumination and drivers
head posture. To have real-time experiments a multi thread
framework is developed to run both CNN and LSTM in parallel.
Finally, results indicate the hybrid of CNN and LSTM ability
in drowsiness detection and the effectiveness of the proposed
method.
Index Terms—Drowsiness detection and prediction, Convo-
lutional neural network, Long-Short Term Memory, Hybrid
Approach
I. INTRODUCTION
D
ROWSINESS is a leading cause of accidents. As it is
reported by National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Adminis-
tration(NHTSA), drowsy driving claimed more than 792 lives
in 2019. Since monitoring the driver awareness is of high
importance, scientists are mostly focused on the ﬁrst stage of
sleep process which named drowsiness phase [1]. Primarily,
the state of driver drowsiness is detected by monitoring
three types of measurements: physiological-based (using EEG,
ECG, EOG and EMG signals [2]), vehicle-based (focusing
on deviations from lane position, movement of the steering
wheel [3] and pressure on the acceleration pedal [4]) and
behavioral-based measurements (including yawning, eye clo-
sure, head pose etc. [5]). According to the prior tests, best
performance of drowsiness estimation is achieved by tracking
eye behavior [6] hence, in this study eye state changes and
driver yawning is selected to be focused. Existing methods for
classiﬁcation of open and closed eyes can be largely divided
into two categories; 1) Non-image based such as electro-
oculography (EOG), which captures the electrical signals of
the muscles in vicinity of eyes and 2) Image-based methods.
In the latter approaches, the ﬁrst step is determining the eyes
location and making decision on its closeness/openness. In
this regard, there are various image processing algorithms
for extracting features. For instance, there are methods based
on support vector machine (SVM) [7], neural networks [8]
and probability density functions (PDF) [9] and histogram of
oriented gradient-based SVM (HOG-SVM) [10]. Since it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd the optimal number of mentioned features in
images, we proposed a CNN-based method, based on its clas-
siﬁcation capability. Multiple architectures provide the ability
to recognize visual patterns directly from pixel images with
minimal preprocessing. For instance, AlexNet, ZFNet, ResNet,
VGGNet and YOLO are designed with different number of
convolutional layers, pooling layers and fully connected layers
for distinct applications [11]. As stated in [12], ResNet50,
VGG16 and InceptionV3 are trained, and the features are
fused to detect facial movements such as blinking, yawning
and swaying with 78% accuracy. In [13] the Viola-jones
Algorithm is utilized to detect face and eyes, then a four-
layer-convolutional classiﬁer is trained to detect closed eye
as a symbol of drowsiness. In this method, the momentary
behavior is considered and achieved 96.4% with accuracy.
Naurois et.all [14] applied MATLAB neural network toolbox
to detect and predict the driver drowsiness. In this study,
they achieved 4.18min as a predicted time via using driver
behavior, psychological and vehicle measurements simultane-
ously. Multi task convolutional neural networks (MTCNN) in
accordance with facial landmarks are investigated to detect
face in complex situations and determine the eye and mouth
closure with the angle of the landmarks [15]. The experimental
results show 92% accuracy. In [16] a method is provided
which uses VGG18 as a pretrained CNN along with a camera
installed inside the car; as a result, it is claimed that the
accuracy reaches 99%. This approach not only detects driver
distraction but also the cause of that by analyzing the driver
images. Sughra Razzaq et al. [17] investigated a hybrid method
which tracks driver facial features consist of eyes and mouth
closeness/openness and road lane departure; they applied skin
segmentation to remove the unnecessary background from
face images and MATLAB vision techniques to detect lane
departures. Moreover, using combination of two cameras cap-
turing the road and drivers video data, they predicted whether
the driver is unconscious or not. Another kind of neural
networks are recurrent neural networks(RNN) which use prior
information to perform present task. They are mostly used in
language modeling, however; video sequence detection and
image captioning can be considered as well. Moreover due to
their limited memory, LSTM networks are developed such that
can select the information to remember or forget, and they are
arXiv:2104.00125v1  [cs.CV]  31 Mar 2021

2
capable of learning long-term dependencies. Weiwei Zhang
and Jinya Su in [18] discussed driver yawning detection as
a feature of being drowsy. In their system a CNN (Google
Net) is trained to extract the features of images and an LSTM
to analyze temporal characteristics which leads to accurate
results. As it is mentioned, deciding on driver drowsiness
level is mostly affected by eye features and the mouth plays a
signiﬁcant role as well. In this work, transfer learning approach
is used to train the pretrained YOLOv3 CNN with our own
dataset developed on face, opened/closed eyes, mouth/yawn
and eyebrow detection. This CNN is utilized to produce a
two-dimensional sequence of closed eye and yawning duration
time series that is used as LSTM dataset. Finally, with the help
of LSTM, drowsiness detection besides prediction is realized.
The rest of this paper as follows: Section II focuses on our
own dataset, in section III the perposed method for drowsiness
detection/prediction is presented IV experimental results are
reported and ﬁnally in section V conclusions are articulated.
II. OUR DATASET
The invented dataset mainly has two parts. Part 1 is a
group of labeled images for training CNN and part 2 is a
developed time series for training LSTM network. Described
methods in introduction section performed high accuracy
rates. They, however, faced some limitations due to changing
conditions including illumination, head pose, wearing glasses,
facial expression etc. Although different datasets are made and
available such as DDD [19] and YawDD [20], we generated
our own dataset which carefully consists of most conditions to
train our neural network as accurate as possible and robust to
the variations. To make dataset for part1, a PS3 camera with
640 × 480 pixels resolution is installed in the middle of dash
and recorded 30fps RGB video of participants who sat in
the car to have better simulation of driving mode. Mentioned
procedures are done during the daylight for different lightening
conditions and participants were asked to look at points a to
e as depicted in Fig. 1 while they talk, laugh, look at sides,
yawn and close their eyes smoothly to provide a rich dataset.
Finally, 28 videos in .avi format achieved from 18 male and
10 female candidates. and videos audio were removed in order
to reduce the ﬁle size. Next, 1042 number of images are
extracted with enough variations in .jpg format by a python
code, from videos. This method of extracting images, prepares
them as many as required, more or less than 1042, based on
neural network depth. The following abbreviations in Table
I, have been used to name the participant folders, consist of
images and videos. In this method of naming, information
about images containing gender, light condition and wearing
glasses or not are accessible. Additional information including
the permission for publishing images in the paper are available
in dataset documents.
For instance, FBNg21 stands for a Female in Bright who
does not wear glasses and she is the 21st participant. Images
are manually labeled. As a result, a .xml ﬁle is made as
an annotation for each image that is required for training
and validation process in supervised learning. Sample of a
labeled image with bounding boxes and its annotation ﬁle
(a) view.1
(b) view.2
(c) view.3
(d) view.4
(e) view.5
Fig. 1. Images with different head pose
TABLE I
ABBREVIATIONS
gender
light
glasses or not
F: female
B: bright
G: yes
M: male
D: dark
Ng: no
is depicted in Fig. 2; as it is indicated, the annotation ﬁle
consists of each object along with its correspondence bounding
box location. Initially, eyebrows were not determined in our
model. It turns out, a few head posture inducements CNN
wrongly considers eyebrow as closed eyes (e.g. Fig. 1a). To
resolve it, we add eyebrow to the labels. Labels consist of
face, mouth, yawn, opened eye, closed eye and eyebrow. To
enhance the results, the produced dataset is augmented with
DDD dataset. In the ﬁrst phase, selected CNN is trained on
our dataset, then evaluated on DDD videos. For the second
phase, 250 challenging images, consisting sunglasses and low
light situation were extracted. the enhanced dataset is utilized
for training and the results are reported. Second part of the
dataset is needed for LSTM neural network. In order to train
RNNs, it is essential to have past sequences information. For
example, in language processing, a sequence of characters is
utilized through the time. As a closely related work in [13]
open or closeness of eyes and yawn were saved as binary
values in the feature vector in order to train an LSTM. In this
work, to train an LSTM a dataset is developed that comprises
the sleeping stages for 10 people and unlike the mentioned
method eye closure and yawning duration time are saved as
two-dimensional time series data instead of binary values. The
values are in millisecond and stored as a .txt ﬁle to be used
for LSTM training.
Remark: The dataset for LSTM NN has 2D dimensions.
One for blinking and the other for yawning.

3
(a) image
(b) part of annotation
Fig. 2. Labeled image and annotation ﬁle in dataset
III. METHODOLOGY
This section is dedicated to our methodology to detect and
predict driver drowsiness based on images which are recorded
while driving. Considering real-time operation as a highly
important issue in driver drowsiness detection, a fast and
accurate neural network is needed. In this research YOLOv3
CNN is applied as a pretrained network, which is proved to
be utilized as a powerful means for object detection [21].
Since it is rare to have dataset with sufﬁcient size for
training CNN weights from scratch, transfer learning method
have been used commonly. In this regard, there are three major
scenarios in transfer learning as follows: employing CNN as
a ﬁxed feature extractor, ﬁne-tuning CNN and deploying a
pretrained model. As our dataset is partly small, the second
scenario is selected. In ﬁne-tuning method, the strategy is
not only replacing and retraining the classiﬁer on top layers
with new dataset, but also to ﬁne-tuning the weights of the
pretrained network by continuing the backpropagation [22]. In
order to follow this scenario, last weights of training YOLOv3
on COCO dataset [22] is used as initial values in training
procedure on our dataset.
On the other hand, recurrent neural networks are efﬁcient
solutions for learning a scenario like sleeping. Although it is
not easy to train RNNs due to gradient explode or vanish,
LSTM as a special type of RNN is capable of learning long-
term dependencies.
In this research an LSTM is used to do sequence classi-
ﬁcation. Additionally, the mentioned YOLO CNN is exerted
to produce sequence of closed eye and yawning time with
0.1sec sample time. Then, a sliding window with 5sec size
moves toward this sequence with determined stride that in this
case is 1 and the input for the LSTM is prepared. Since CNN
has more complicated computations, multi thread coding is
assigned to apply CNN and LSTM together in parallel. As
shown in Fig. 3, each frame passes through CNN and LSTM,
to estimate the probability of drowsiness and warn the driver.
Fig. 3. Schematic of the proposed method
Fig. 4. LSTM architecture
Note that, the driver drowsiness prediction can be realized via
monitoring this value; in which additive variations in this value
can inform the driver about the incoming drowsiness.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This part accentuated the results of implemented method to
evaluate its efﬁciency. Both CNN and LSTM are employed
to analyze yawn and eye closure and to detect the driver
drowsiness. After the detection, eye closure and yawning
duration are saved as time series data; then a predetermined
sliding window with length of 5 is passed through this data
sequence and classiﬁcation of the driver behaviors dynamic is
done via utilizing this window as the LSTM input. Analyzing
video frames takes more time than numerical data time series;

4
(a) view.1
(b) view.2
(c) view.3
Fig. 5. CNN results for different head pose with no glasses. part I
additionally, the size of LSTM is less than the CNN in this
paper, thus, CNN is slower than LSTM and if both work in
succession in a same thread, some of the data will be lost.
In order to solve this problem a multi thread algorithm is
applied that helps CNN and LSTM work in parallel. In other
words, after a while that the ﬁrst LSTM input is prepared
through CNN detections; at the time the LSTM is processing
its input, the CNN is also processing the next image in
parallel to produce the next sample for LSTM input sequence.
This method minimizes the lost information in missed images
and the total system speed is optimized. Furthermore, neural
networks have been run on GPU to obtain sufﬁcient speed of
30fps.
YOLOv3 is trained for about 4000 iterations on the training
data set; throughout training a batch size of 16 is exploited
along with a momentum of 0.9 and decay of 0.0005, and
(a) view.5
(b) view.4
Fig. 6. CNN results for different head pose with no glasses. part II
ﬁnally 0.87 for mean average precision (mAP) is obtained.
Utilizing this result, our network is able to detect every object
among the deﬁned labels in almost all head poses due to
YOLOv3 depth and rich dataset. Moreover, LSTM is trained
for 100 epochs with batch size of 64 and the 91.7% accuracy is
resulted. The LSTM architecture used in this paper is indicated
in Fig. 4. In the following, results of trained CNN and LSTM
are reported.
As it is shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 YOLO CNN is capable
to detect objects accurately in almost every position. Samples
of wearing glasses is depicted in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 indicate the
limitation of detecting eyebrows in some positions because of
glasses frame. Note that in the reported images besides facial
feature labels, two numbers on left-top exist; one is the closed
eye time and the other is the time passed after the last yawn
detection. These two numbers are going to be used to make
the two-dimensional LSTM input.
Results of the hybrid system of LSTM and CNN are com-
pared with a single CNN based method. In the latter approach
mainly two strategies are followed: Since blinking normally
takes 300 to 400 milliseconds, 5 seconds can be considered
as a threshold for the ﬁrst strategy which yawning is not
considered and just increasing an eye closure duration over
the threshold will cause an alarm for fatigue and drowsiness.
For second strategy, to take the yawning into account, the
threshold is manipulated and decreased to 3 seconds as a
result of yawning detection. To clarify, when yawn is detected,
the system warns driver if his/her eyes closure time last
more than 3 seconds. It is remarkable to point out that each

5
(a) view.1
(b) view.2
(c) view.3
Fig. 7. CNN results for different head pose with glasses. part I
time that the yawning is detected; its effect on the threshold
remains for 2 minutes until the sensitivity caused by yawning
is eliminated and the strategy comes back to the ﬁrst state. The
decision-making ﬂowchart is depicted in Fig. ??. The CNN
approach uses only a threshold and may detect drowsiness too
late. Whiles LSTM works in parallel with CNN; uses CNN
outputs to learn the driver behavior and predict drowsiness
using past sequence of the driver behaviors like blinking
slowly. Considering a single CNN method, each frame can
be processed and according to the mentioned strategies the
system may warn the driver. This way only the current image
frame is checked each time; thus, the information in the image
frame sequence about the driver behavior is not going to be
used in drowsiness detection. The LSTM however, utilizes
the data sequence; therefore, in contrast with the single CNN
method there is a possibility to detect drowsiness even if
(a) view.4
(b) view.5
Fig. 8. CNN results for different head pose with glasses. part II
the speciﬁed threshold is not reached. Moreover, this system
can predict drowsiness through incoming data sequences. This
big difference is enough to use the hybrid system of LSTM
and CNN together instead of a single CNN. To get a better
intuition, experimental results are reported in Fig. 9 and Fig.
10, and the comparison is made between the two analyzed
approaches. It is notable to insinuate that in each ﬁgure at
the upper-left corner there are two numbers indicating eye
closeness duration and the time passed after the last yawning,
respectively. The LSTM output is probability of drowsiness
which 50% is considered as threshold to warn the driver.
Fig. 9 along with Fig. 10 are displaying a video frame
sequence for a driver. Suppose that before Fig. 9a the driver
behavior is normal as the LSTM output is 0.026. Then the
point that 0.102sec duration is measured for eye closeness(as
shown in Fig. 9a), may indicate a starting of a drowsiness
process; In Fig. 9b, although both two times at the upper-
left corner are zero, the LSTM output is 0.14. Furthermore,
in Fig. 9c the eye closeness duration time is 0.19 thus, the
LSTM output is 0.16 indicating a drowsiness probability of
16%. Increase in eye closure duration in Fig. 9d , 10a and
10b is a signiﬁcant sign of drowsiness as the hybrid system
and the single CNN both are warning the driver as in Fig. 10c.
The difference between the two mentioned methods is
apparent but to show one more excellence of the hybrid
system, Fig. 10d is reported. As it is seen the single CNN right
after opened eye detection stops warning the driver because it
is just processing the current image frame; Instead, the hybrid

6
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 9. comparison of LSTM and CNN results. part I
system is still warning the driver with even high value of
drowsiness probability.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, a method based on a hybrid system of LSTM
and CNN was proposed for robust drowsiness detection and
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 10. comparison of LSTM and CNN results. part II
prediction. Yolo.v3 was used as the CNN to detect facial
features. To train this CNN a new dataset was developed,
and transfer learning was used. Furthermore, an LSTM neural
network was applied to classify a two-dimensional sequence
of data produced by the mentioned CNN. Moreover, recording
eye closeness duration and the time passed just after a yawning

7
detected produced a rich dataset for the LSTM training. As
an applicable tool to detect and predict drowsiness in real
implementation, a multi thread framework was developed to
run both CNN and LSTM in parallel to further enhance the
performance of the proposed approach. Finally, to show the
effectiveness of the presented method, a comparison was made
between two cases of using a hybrid system of CNN and
LSTM and using a single CNN with two strategies. Finally
experiments indicated the robust performance of the proposed
approach in drowsiness detection and prediction.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Rutigliano, M. W. Rivolta, R. Pizzi, and R. Sassi, “Composition of
feature extraction methods shows interesting performances in discrim-
inating wakefulness and nrem sleep,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 204–208, 2018.
[2] T. Igasaki, K. Nagasawa, N. Murayama, and Z. Hu, “Drowsiness
estimation under driving environment by heart rate variability and/or
breathing rate variability with logistic regression analysis,” in Biomedical
Engineering and Informatics (BMEI), 2015 8th International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 189–193.
[3] M. Alirezaei, M. Corno, D. Katzourakis, A. Ghaffari, and R. Kazemi, “A
robust steering assistance system for road departure avoidance,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1953–1960,
2012.
[4] M. Alirezaei, M. Corno, A. Ghaffari, and R. Kazemi, “A new approach
to the design of coordinated road departure avoidance systems,” Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part K: Journal of
Multi-body Dynamics, vol. 226, no. 1, pp. 45–60, 2012.
[5] A. Ghaffari, A. Khodayari, M. Rezvan, and A. Vahidi Shams, “A robust
head pose tracking and estimating aprouch for driver assistant system,”
in Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 180–186.
[6] R. Sasikala, S. Suresh, J. Chandramohan, and M. Valanrajkumar, “Driver
drowsiness detection system using image processing technique by the
human visual system,” International Journal of Emerging Technologies
in Engineering Research (IJETER), vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1–11, 2018.
[7] M. Zareapoor, P. Shamsolmoali, D. K. Jain, H. Wang, and J. Yang,
“Kernelized support vector machine with deep learning: an efﬁcient
approach for extreme multiclass dataset,” Pattern Recognition Letters,
vol. 115, pp. 4–13, 2018.
[8] A. Khodayari, A. Ghaffari, R. Kazemi, and R. Braunstingl, “A modiﬁed
car-following model based on a neural network model of the human
driver effects,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-
Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1440–1449, 2012.
[9] A. A. Lenskiy and J.-S. Lee, “Driver’s eye blinking detection using
novel color and texture segmentation algorithms,” International journal
of control, automation and systems, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 317–327, 2012.
[10] L. Pauly and D. Sankar, “Detection of drowsiness based on hog
features and svm classiﬁers,” in Research in Computational Intelligence
and Communication Networks (ICRCICN), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 181–186.
[11] J. Huang, V. Rathod, C. Sun, M. Zhu, A. Korattikara, A. Fathi, I. Fischer,
Z. Wojna, Y. Song, S. Guadarrama et al., “Speed/accuracy trade-offs for
modern convolutional object detectors,” in IEEE CVPR, vol. 4, 2017.
[12] V. Vijayan and E. Sherly, “Real time detection system of driver drowsi-
ness based on representation learning using deep neural networks,”
Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1977–1985,
2019.
[13] V. R. R. Chirra, S. ReddyUyyala, and V. K. K. Kolli, “Deep cnn: A
machine learning approach for driver drowsiness detection based on eye
state.” Revue d’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 461–466, 2019.
[14] C. J. de Naurois, C. Bourdin, A. Stratulat, E. Diaz, and J.-L. Vercher,
“Detection and prediction of driver drowsiness using artiﬁcial neural
network models,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 126, pp. 95–
104, 2019.
[15] W. Deng and R. Wu, “Real-time driver-drowsiness detection system
using facial features,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118 727–118 738, 2019.
[16] S. Masood, A. Rai, A. Aggarwal, M. Doja, and M. Ahmad, “Detect-
ing distraction of drivers using convolutional neural network,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, 2018.
[17] S. Razzaq, M. N. Ahmad, M. M. Hamayun, A. ur Rahman, and M. M.
Fraz, “A hybrid approach for fatigue detection and quantiﬁcation,” in
Multi-topic Conference (INMIC), 2017 International.
IEEE, 2017, pp.
1–7.
[18] W. Zhang and J. Su, “Driver yawning detection based on long short
term memory networks,” in Computational Intelligence (SSCI), 2017
IEEE Symposium Series on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[19] C.-H. Weng, Y.-H. Lai, and S.-H. Lai, “Driver drowsiness detection via
a hierarchical temporal deep belief network,” in Asian Conference on
Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 117–133.
[20] S. Abtahi, M. Omidyeganeh, S. Shirmohammadi, and B. Hariri, “Yawdd:
A yawning detection dataset,” in Proceedings of the 5th ACM Multime-
dia Systems Conference.
ACM, 2014, pp. 24–28.
[21] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “Yolov3: An incremental improvement,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767, 2018.
[22] S. J. Pan, Q. Yang et al., “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE
Transactions on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 22, no. 10, pp.
1345–1359, 2010.
