Vision Transformers and YoloV5 based Driver
Drowsiness Detection Framework
Ghanta Sai Krishna∗, Kundrapu Supriya†, Jai Vardhan‡ and Mallikharjuna Rao K §
Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Department, IIIT Naya Raipur∗§
Computer science and Engineering, IIIT Naya Raipur†‡
IEEE Member §
∗ghanta20102@iiitnr.edu.in, †kundrapu20100@iiitnr.edu.in, ‡jai20100@iiitnr.edu.in, §rao.mkrao@gmail.com
Abstract—Human drivers have distinct driving techniques,
knowledge, and sentiments due to unique driving traits. Driver
drowsiness has been a serious issue endangering road safety;
therefore, it is essential to design an effective drowsiness detection
algorithm to bypass road accidents. Miscellaneous research
efforts have been approached the problem of detecting anomalous
human driver behaviour to examine the frontal face of the driver
and automobile dynamics via computer vision techniques. Still,
the conventional methods cannot capture complicated driver
behaviour features. However, with the origin of deep learning
architectures, a substantial amount of research has also been
executed to analyze and recognize driver’s drowsiness using
neural network algorithms. This paper introduces a novel frame-
work based on vision transformers and YoloV5 architectures
for driver drowsiness recognition. A custom YoloV5 pre-trained
architecture is proposed for face extraction with the aim of
extracting Region of Interest (ROI). Owing to the limitations of
previous architectures, this paper introduces vision transformers
for binary image classiﬁcation which is trained and validated on
a public dataset UTA-RLDD. The model had achieved 96.2%
and 97.4% as it’s training and validation accuracies respectively.
For the further evaluation, proposed framework is tested on a
custom dataset of 39 participants in various light circumstances
and achieved 95.5% accuracy. The conducted experimentations
revealed the signiﬁcant potential of our framework for practical
applications in smart transportation systems.
Index
Terms—Drowsiness
detection,
Vision
transformers,
YoloV5, Image classiﬁcation, Face detection
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the lack of drowsiness detection systems in Ad-
vanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS), numerous drivers
and pedestrians are seriously injured as result of drowsy
driving. According to the Central Road Research Institute
(CRRI), fatigued drivers who fall asleep while driving are
responsible for around 40 percent of all trafﬁc fatalities and
injuries. According to the report by National Highway Trafﬁc
Safety Administration (NHTSA) [1], approximately 1,00,000
accidents take place every year due to drowsy driving resulting
in 2000 deaths and 70,000 injuries. And around 80% of
drowsiness-related car accidents are individual vehicle run-off-
road crashes, in which a driver loses control of their vehicle
and eventually leaves their lane or collides with the rear of the
car ahead. [2]. Therefore, drowsy driving is a signiﬁcant and
latent risk factor for road accidents. Hence, it is necessary to
develop a systematic drowsiness detection algorithm in order
to reduce road accidents.
Drowsy driving detection has emerged as a signiﬁcant
research area in recent years. According to recent stud-
ies, drowsiness detection techniques are classiﬁed into three
categories: physiological measures, vehicle-based measures,
and face analysis [3], [4]. Firstly, physiological measures
are dependent on body elements such as heart rate, body
temperature, pulse rate, and so on, as physical conditions alter
when a driver becomes tired [5]. In general, ECG [6], EEG
[7], EMG, and EOG [8] are the commonly used physiological
signals for assessing the physical conditions of a human
(driver). The main disadvantage of adopting physiological
methods is that it is crucial to assure driver convenience
while wearing sensors [9]. Second, vehicle-based measures
detect drowsiness by observing vehicle behaviour such as
steering wheel movement, random braking, speed variations,
and so on. Sensors are installed in the vehicle components
to monitor driving performance and identify driving trends in
order to detect drowsiness. The main drawback of adopting
vehicle-based methods is that the vehicle’s behaviour can
be altered owing to bad weather and road conditions, heavy
medication, and so on [10]. Finally, behavioural measures or
face analysis detect drowsiness by observing facial expressions
and movements using machine learning and computer vision
(CV) [11].
In recent years, numerous behavioral methods have been
developed to detect drowsiness. For facial expression and
drowsiness detection, various researches used different algo-
rithms. Algorithms used for detecting facial expressions in-
clude ViolaJones (Haarcascade) [12], and canny edge detection
[3] and neural network algorithms like CNN [13], ANN [14],
Naive Bayes classiﬁer [12], and GAN’s [15] can be used for
drowsiness detection. In this paper, we proposed a behavioral
method framework from face detection to drowsiness detection
using Yolo V5 and Vision Transformers (ViT). The signiﬁcant
contributions of this paper are as follows:
•
Trained customized YoloV5 pretrained model for
face detection.
•
Built and analysed the robust binary image classiﬁ-
cation model with vision transformers for drowsiness
detection.
•
Tested the framework with real-time custom dataset
consisting different scenarios
arXiv:2209.01401v1  [cs.CV]  3 Sep 2022

The following sections of this research paper are organized
chronologically. Section II provides an overview of the recent
drowsiness detection techniques. Section III describes the pa-
per’s approach in sequential order, beginning with face identiﬁ-
cation using YoloV5, progressing to image augmentation, and
ending with image classiﬁcation using Vision Transformers.
Section IV provides a in detail explanation of the experimental
analysis of the model and its test on custom dataset. Section V
is comprehended with key ﬁndings and comparative analysis.
Finally, Section VI concludes this research paper.
II. RELATED WORKS
Nowadays, driving is a vital and routine activity for many
people, hence indepth attempts are required to understand,
recognize and forecast the driving behaviour of the people.
Inorder to fulﬁll the need, numerous experiments have taken
place in order to detect unusual driver behaviour like drowsi-
ness etc. In recent years, advanced methods have been used in
order to attain improved performance of drowsiness detection
systems. Zuojin Li et al. [16] examined vehicle based methods.
In the method, they collected different types of drowsiness data
like yaw angles and steering wheel angles by using sensors
attached to vehicle The features obtained from steering wheel
angles and yaw angles are examined, and approximate entropy
features are calculated on time series data. To identify the
drowsiness state of the driver the paper uses approximate en-
tropy features as input for Back-propagation Neural Networks
classiﬁer and obtained an accuracy of 87.21%. The algorithm
identiﬁes the driver as awake, drowsy, and very drowsy.
Behavioral methods have been introduced in recent years to
overcome the problems caused by physiological and vehicle-
based methods. Behavioral methods are more reliable than
vehicle-based methods because they focus on the driver’s facial
expression rather than the vehicle’s behaviour. On the other
hand, Physiological methods produce highly accurate results
but are not widely used due to their complicated nature.
Advancing the behavioral methods, Sherif Said et al. [17]
proposed a drowsiness detection system which involves Viola
Jones algorithm for detecting eye and face regions. The system
detects the drowsiness state of the driver and sends an alarm
to alert the driver. This system was tested for indoor and
outdoor environments and it has shown 82% and 72.8% for
indoor and outdoor environments respectively. Feng You [18]
constructed an algorithm that performs ofﬂine training on the
driver before it can be used online. Dlib’s CNN is used for
detecting the face regions, and the eye aspect ratio is calculated
using Dlib’s 68 point facial landmarks. The algorithm used
for identifying drowsiness is divided into two stages: ofﬂine
training that uses SVM classiﬁer and online monitoring for
detecting the driver’s state online. After a comparative analysis
the accuracy of the proposed algorithm is 94.8% but the main
disadvantage is that the SVM classiﬁer requires training from
the end-users i.e, it must be trained for every driver. In [15],
Generative Adversarial networks (GAN) was introduced for
data augmentation and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
for prediction. After a detailed analysis, the authors concluded
that usage of GAN produced new data samples (practical
images) and CNN’s have increased the accuracy of the model.
R Tamanani et al. [19] proposed a method that consists of
two sequential systems: the input system which employs the
Haar cascade algorithm for face detection and preprocessing
of real-time input video stream data, and the output system
employs the CNN LeNet architecture for feature extraction and
image classiﬁcation. The model was evaluated using stratiﬁed
5-fold cross validation on UTA-RLDD, and it attained an
average accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of 91.8%,
92.8%, and 92%, respectively. On a custom dataset, the system
has achieved an accuracy of 98%, 84%, and 88% on the
training, validation, and testing data, respectively.
In our proposed framework we explored novel architectures
YoloV5 [20], [21] and vision transformers [22], [23], [24], [25]
which have advantages over existing frameworks. To analyze
the performance in real-time, the proposed framework is tested
with custom dataset.
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This section discusses our proposed novel framework, which
mainly consists of two phases. A custom YoloV5 pre-trained
model and self-trained ViT architecture are proposed for
automated face extraction, and binary image classiﬁcation. We
also review data augmentation which is performed to increase
the data for obtaining a skillful ViT model. The illustration
of a concise schema of the framework consisting drowsiness
recognition algorithms is in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Overview of proposed framework
The proposed system utilizes two video datasets: 1) Univer-
sity of Texas at Arlington Real-Life Drowsiness Dataset (UTA-
RLDD) 2) Custom dataset collected. The proposed system
works on a single frame in detecting drowsiness. Hence,
frames are extracted from the video dataset and serve as the
framework’s input.

A. Face detection with YoloV5
As most of the extracted frames from both datasets are wide-
angle frames, there is a need to extract Region of Interest
(ROI) from the wide-angle frames to improve the model’s
performance. For face detection and computerised cropping
of faces from wide-angle frames, the YoloV5 framework is
utilized. The YoloV5 architecture is the amalgamation of Cross
Stage Partial network (CSP) and the Darknet. The weights and
the conﬁgurations for YoloV5 architecture are accomplished
by annotating ROI for set of wide-angle frames in the UTA-
RLDD dataset. The CSP and Darknet grid does the feature
extraction and target information extraction from the annotated
input image. During face identiﬁcation, the input vector is
divided into A × A grids. If the centre of the target is in
a grid, then that particular grid is accountable for the target
identiﬁcation. The location of the regression box of the face
can be obtained by following (1) :
Cj
i = Pi,j × IOU T rue
P redicted
(1)
Where, Cj
i symbolises the conﬁdence score of the jth
bounding box of the ith grid. Pi,j denotes whether there exists
a target in the jth bounding box of the ith grid. If the target
is within the bounding box, then Pi,j will be equal to one if
not zero. The IOU T rue
P redicted is widely utilised parameter that
characterises the Intersection Over Union (IOU) between the
true box and the estimated box. The more precise the location
of the predicted box is predicted when the IOU score is high.
B. Image Augmentation
Training Vision Transformer models on more image data
can result in better accurate and skilful models. The Image
augmentation techniques can generate variations of the images
that can enhance the mastery and performance of the ViT
frameworks. Image augmentation is a technique to artiﬁcially
create new training images from existing training images. The
image transformations include various operations like shift,
ﬂip, zoom, etc. The Fig. 2 represents the augmentation of a
sample cropped face. The Table I represents the conﬁguration
for the data augmentation to generate new training image data.
Fig. 2. Augmentation of a sample cropped face
TABLE I
DATA AUGMENTATION FACTORS USED
Technique
Hyper-parameter
Normalization
✓
Resize
✓
Random Flip
Horizantal
Random Rotation
Factor = 0.01
Random Zoom
Factor = 0.2
Random Brightness
Range = [0.2, 1.0]
C. Vision Transformers for Image Classiﬁcation
After executing face detection and image augmentation,
there is a need for efﬁcient machine learning architecture to
fulﬁl image classiﬁcation. The current research methodology
uses vision transformers for effective image classiﬁcation. The
ViT framework utilizes the transformer model with succes-
sions of image speckles without involving the convolution
layers in the framework. Perspective to the traditional trans-
formers, an input frame is resized and converted into N patches
and delivers the successions of linear embeddings of these
separated patches as an input to the ViT architecture.
I ∈RH×W ×C ⇒IP ∈RN×(P 2.C)
(2)
N = H × W/P 2
(3)
In the above equations (2) (3), H, W, C represents the
height, width and channels of the original image, (P, P) is
the resolution of a every patch and N represents total number
of resulting patches. The illustration of the speckles created
from the sample image is shown in Fig. 3. The characteristics
of the patches created from the image are in the Table II.
Fig. 3. Visualization of the patches and embeddings
TABLE II
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CREATED PATCHES
Technique
Skewness
Size of image
392 × 392
Size of patch
28 × 28
Patches per image
196
Elements per patch
2352

Fig. 4. (a) Generation of patch embeddings and Conceptual overview of ViT model (b) Transformer Encoder (c) Multi head Attention block
Furthermore, the matrices of every patch with dimensions
(P, P) are ﬂattened into matrices of dimensions (1, P 2). To ob-
tain a linear patch projection, these ﬂattened patches (E(1,P 2))
are transmitted via a single feed forward layer which contain
embedding matrix (F(P 2,D)). After projecting, the patches
transformed into a constant latent vector of size D (projection
dimension) which are called as patch embeddings (E(1,D)).
The generation of patch embeddings and conceptual overview
of ViT model is visualized in Fig. 4(a). A learnable [class]
embedding is prehended to linear patch projections to assist the
classiﬁcation head. As the data is sent at an instance, the order
of successions is not implemented naturally. To resolve this
problem, an erratically forged positional embedding matrix
(Epos) is added to the concatenated matrix consisting of the
patch embeddings (E) and the learnable class embedding
(Iclass). The resultant embedded successions of extracted
patches with the token z0 is delivered in (4)(5).
z0 = [Iclass; x1E; x2E; ...; xnE] + Epos
(4)
where
E ∈R(P 2C)×D, Epos ∈R(N+1)×D
(5)
These embedding sequences together are input for trans-
former encoder, which consists of L identical layers of Multi-
headed Self-Attention (MSA) blocks and Multi-Layer Percep-
tron (MLP) blocks as shown in Fig. 4(b). Both subcomponents
of the transformer encoder operates with normalization layer
(LN) succeeded by residual skip connections as shown in
mathematical expressions (6), (7).
z‘
l = MSA(LN(zl−1)) + zl−1
(6)
zl = MLP(LN(z‘
l)) + z‘
l
(7)
The procedures involved in MSA block are represented in
Fig. 4(c). In the attention block, the input vectors are stacked
and multiplied by an initial batch of weights Wq, Wk, and Wv
to produce three individual matrices of queries Q, keys K, and
values V. A dot product is calculated from every query q from
Q and all the keys k in K, i.e., the matrix Q is multiplied with
the transpose of the matrix K to compute the attention matrix.
The scaling dot-product executed in the Self Attention (SA)
block is equivalent to the regular dot-product, but it integrates
the dimension of the key dk as a scaling factor. The attention
weight is calculated by feeding the dot product results to
the softmax. The scaled dot product attention for a head is
estimated by multiplying attention weight with the value of
each patch embedding’s vector as represented in (8). The MSA
block in the utilised transformer encoder calculates the scaled
dot-product attention individually for h heads. The outcomes
of all of the attention heads are concatenated together and then
passed through a feed-forward layer with learnable weights
W 0 as shown in (9).
SA = Softmax(QKT
√dk
) × V = Wattention × V
(8)
MSA = concat(SA1; SA2; .....SAh) × W 0
(9)

W 0 ∈Rhdk×D
The MLP block consists of fully connected feed-forward
dense layers with GeLU non-linearity. At ﬁnal layer of en-
coder, the foremost element in the sequence zL is passed to
an external lead classiﬁer for estimating the class labels.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
A. Dataset Preparation and Utilization
This experiment utilizes a drowsiness estimation benchmark
dataset UTA-RLDD [26], which is one of the most consid-
erable dataset among available public datasets, for training
the ViT model. The training UTA-RLDD dataset includes
36 participants with distinct scenarios. The videos in dataset
correspond to the two most essential situations: drowsiness-
related symptoms (yawning, nodding) and a combination of
non-drowsiness related activity (talking, laughing, gazing at
both sides), individually lasting around one and half minutes.
The random frames of each participant are collected and
binarily labelled based on their drowsiness status as either
active or fatigued. The resolution of the frames in this dataset
is 640 × 480, which is relatively high compared to other
drowsiness detection datasets. The faces in the dataset have
signiﬁcant transformations in scale, pose, and perceptions.
Thus, this benchmark dataset is appropriate to demonstrate the
efﬁciency and performance in practical scenarios. This image
dataset is operated for the annotating and training the YoloV5
and ViT models.
The testing of the complete framework is entirely performed
by custom dataset. The dataset is collected for 39 subjects with
high resolute DSLR camera. The variations in posture, angle of
view, and orientation of capturing of the subjects are increased
in comparision with UTA-RLDD Dataset. The speciﬁcations
of our custom dataset and UTA-RLDD dataset is given below
in Table III
TABLE III
COMPARISION OF THE DATASETS
Attribute
UTA-RLDD Dataset
Our Dataset
Frame resolution
640 × 480
3840 × 2160
Number of Subjects
36
39
Collected in day and night
×
✓
Multi-oriental frames
×
✓
Number of scenarios
Five
Nine
Number of frames
9180
1246
Utilization
Training, Validation
Testing
B. Computation Speciﬁcations of proposed system
This section deals with both the hardware and software
computational speciﬁcations of our driver drowsiness detection
framework. Tensorﬂow 2.0, Keras, and OpenCV libraries were
utilised to build the framework, which was written in Python
3.9. The YoloV5 and ViT models are not trained using a high-
performance graphics processing unit. The speciﬁcations and
minimum requirements for training and testing the framework
are depicted in Table IV.
TABLE IV
Speciﬁcations
System’s Conﬁguration
Operating system
Ubuntu 20.04.3 LTS
CPU
Intel® i7 10th gen
RAM
15.8 Usable
GPU
Intel® UHD Graphics
Frameworks
Tensorﬂow, OpenCV
C. Evaluating YoloV5 for face detection
The YoloV5 is implemented as a core architecture with all
the conﬁgurations for accurate face detection and to extract
ROI from the input image. We had trained the model with
customized settings with 200 epochs. After several tests, the
minimum conﬁdence score for the model is set to be 0.75. The
precision, recall and mean average precision metric(mAP) at
0.5 threshold curves represented in Fig. 6. The detection effect
of the trained architecture on a samples of the dataset is shown
in Fig. 5. After numerous tests, the speed of the trained YoloV5
has been calculated as 51.9 images per second. After obtaining
the location of the bounding boxes, the ROI is cropped from
the wide-angle frames of both training and validation frames.
Fig. 5. YoloV5 results on sample images in custom dataset
Fig. 6. Visualization of YoloV5 Performance for 200 epochs

Fig. 7. Learning curves of training and validation accuracy and loss for 150 epochs and its confusion matrix
D. Evaluating trained ViT architecture
After face detection, the training set is augmented with efﬁ-
cient methods, as discussed in Section III. In this experiment,
the ViT model is trained for drowsiness state classiﬁcation is
binary as drowsy or alert.
The typical benchmarks for evaluating classiﬁcation models
are used in evaluating our ViT framework. The learning curves
of accuracy and loss for training and validation of the models
are represented in Fig. 7. These learning plots demonstrate
a good ﬁt learning algorithm as the validation and training
curves both maintain a point of stability with minimal gap. In
order to maximize performance, the training of the efﬁcient
ViT model was incorporated with three missions simultane-
ously: 1) computation of output, 2) debugging the errors,
and 3) tuning the hyper-parameters. After multiple iterations
of tuning the hyper-parameters, the maximum training and
validation accuracies are 96.2% and 97.4% respectively which
are achieved with a speciﬁc set of hyper-parameters, as shown
in the Table V.
TABLE V
TUNED HYPERPARAMETERS OF VIT MODEL
Hyper-parameter
Attribute
Number of classes
2
Input shape
(256, 256, 3)
Resized image Size
(392, 392)
Patch Size
28
Batch Size
256
Number of Epochs
150
Learning Rate
0.001
Weight Decay
0.0001
Number of Heads
4
Transformer Layers
8
Transformer Units
[128, 64]
MLP head Units
[2048, 1024]
For further evaluation of the performance of the classiﬁca-
tion ViT model, hamming loss and Binary Cross-Entropy are
calculated. The calculated cross-entropy loss and the hamming
loss for the trained ViT model are 0.6907 and 0.0673 respec-
tively. Being closer to zero, the log loss had indicated good
results. Cross entropy loss had penalized inaccurate predictions
excessively, which is a relevant factor for a loss function, but
undesirable for a metric. Hence, accuracy metrics like Preci-
sion, Recall, and F1 scores were estimated and represented.
The precision, sensitivity (recall), F1-score are estimated based
on the following eq (10), (11),(12) respectively.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(10)
Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN
(11)
F1Score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(12)
where TP is the number of images that are accurately deter-
mined as the drowsiness state; FN is the number of images that
inaccurately recognized as the non-drowsiness state; Fp is the
number of non-drowsiness images that erroneously determined
as the drowsiness state; TN is the number of non-drowsiness
images that precisely recognized as the non- drowsiness state.
The calculated values of precision, recall, F1-score are shown
in the Table VI.
TABLE VI
CALCULATED EVALUATION METRICS
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Image Support
Drowsy
0.97
0.98
0.97
626
Vigilant
0.98
0.97
0.97
620
Macro Average
0.97
0.97
0.97
1246
Weighted Average
0.97
0.97
0.97
1246
E. The Inﬂuence of Training and Validation Data Splits on
Test Accuracy
The primary objective is to determine how the performance
of ViT model predictions on our custom dataset changes with
various combinations of training and validation data sets. In
order to experiment, we selected four combinations of data
splitting for the UTA dataset. We validated and trained the
ViT model on each set (80-20, 70-30, 60-40 and 50-50) and
compared the model’s accuracy after validation and training.

TABLE VII
STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF PERFORMANCE OF VIT MODEL WITH CUSTOM DATASET
Day-Time
Evening-Time
Night-Time
Scenario
Drowsy (F)
Vigilant (F)
Accuracy
Drowsy (F)
Vigilant (F)
Accuracy
Drowsy (F)
Vigilant (F)
Accuracy(F)
Bare Face
0.979
0.978
0.979
0.985
0.979
0.982
0.949
0.954
0.951
Spectacles
0.955
0.959
0.957
0.989
0.979
0.984
0.892
0.917
0.905
Sunglasses
0.932
0.955
0.943
0.965
0.970
0.967
-
-
-
Average
0.955
0.964
0.959
0.980
0.976
0.978
0.921
0.935
0.928
TABLE VIII
COMPARISION OF OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK WITH THE EXISTING MODELS
Research by
Dataset Used
Facial Detector
Classiﬁer
Overall Accuracy
Testing in real time
Bakheet et al. [12]
NTHU
Haar Cascades
HOG, Naive Bayesian
85.62 %
×
Shreyans M et al. [27]
UTA
Dlib
Logistic Regression
75.67 %
×
R Tamanani et al. [19]
UTA
Haar Cascades
LeNet CNN
91.8 %
✓
Anh-Cang et al. [28]
Mixed
SSD Network
MobileNet-V2 and ResNet-50V2
97%
×
Proposed Framework
UTA, Custom dataset
YoloV5
Vision Transformers
97.4 %
✓
Fig. 8. The Impacts of Data Splits
Furthermore, we noticed signiﬁcant differences in accuracy
for the train and validation split ratios, which signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced the testing accuracy on the custom dataset. Finally,
the model’s best training, validation, and testing accuracies are
96.2, 97.4 and 95.5, respectively, with a split of 80-20, as seen
in Fig. 8
F. Evaluation of ViT model with custom dataset
The custom dataset we had made consists of three scenarios
bare face, spectacles and sunglasses with various gestures
collected at day time, evening time, and night time. The pro-
posed system is tested with the custom dataset for evaluation.
Statistical analysis is performed for the model’s performance
on all these scenarios individually, as shown in Table VII.
There are substantial differences in the average accuracies of
the model for the daytime, evening, and nighttime images
in the custom dataset. The average accuracies of daytime,
evening, and nighttime images are 95.9%, 97.8% and 92.8%.
The model had performed better in evening time than daytime
and nighttime due to optimum light conditions. The ﬁnal ViT
model accuracy for the custom dataset is 95.5%.
G. Comparison with existing models
An appropriate combination of architectures for face detec-
tion and classiﬁcation is important to attain optimal perfor-
mance. To achieve ideal performance, many frameworks are
presented with distinct computer vision and machine learning
architectures. The primary focus of this subsection is the
examination of the most delinquent research attempts in iden-
tifying human drowsiness using machine learning architec-
tures. The comprehensive comparison analysis of classiﬁcation
techniques for human drowsiness are presented in Table VIII.
Many face detection algorithms, ranging from haar cascades
to CNNs, have been developed in recent drowsiness detection
research endeavours. These endeavours had also
used a vari-
ety of image classiﬁcation algorithms, ranging from Bayesian
classiﬁers to CNNs.
V. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: KEY FINDINGS AND
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
This section discusses the signiﬁcant ﬁndings as well as a
comparative examination of our proposed model with other
existing research in this ﬁeld. In this section, Our proposed
framework is compared against two distinct factors: the dataset
and the methodology.
Dataset: The capability of driver drowsiness detection sys-
tems is heavily reliant on a several factors in the dataset to be
analysed. A massive quantity of data is involved, indicating
the greater difﬁculty in evaluating the system in real-time [26]
[29]. This is also due to the ambiguity of the kind of image
data in public databases. To address the aforementioned issues,
we gathered a customised dataset based on real-time require-
ments, which resulted in optimal testing results. This dataset is
also simple to analyze, and there is a good chance that it would
be expanded as many investigators on drowsiness detection
systems around the globe may contribute considerably.
YoloV5 and Vision Transformers: Most of the recent
research for drowsiness detection is based on Convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [13], Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) [15], and traditional computer vision techniques [11].

We had proposed a novel framework of YoloV5 and Vi-
sion transformers for drowsiness detection in real-time which
is never implemented before. Various experimentations are
performed with the real-time custom dataset to identify the
efﬁciency of the ViT architecture. In this paper, we present
several extensive comparisons between our proposed system
and existing solutions, which are based on the model’s perfor-
mance.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced vision transformers for
efﬁcient driver drowsiness state estimation. This novel frame-
work mainly comprises two sequential components; the initial
component executes automatic face cropping using YoloV5
pre-trained face detection CNN architecture, and the con-
clusive component performs binary image classiﬁcation with
vision transformer (ViT) architecture. After several compre-
hensive analyses, the YoloV5 achieved around 95% mAP
score. The evaluation of the ViT model indicated that the
framework had attained high values of average precision,
sensitivity, and F1-score, which are 0.97, 0.98, and 0.97,
respectively. In addition, employing a custom dataset indicates
that the ViT architecture had accomplished 95.5% accuracy on
testing.
The limitation of the proposed architecture can be outlined
as follows. Firstly, though the proposed model accomplished
satisfactory detection performance, it requires high amount of
data with labelled scence conditions for model to be trained.
In future works, several arguments can be taken into ac-
count. First, we will optimize the network conﬁguration in
the proposed architecture for use in micro-computing systems
to decrease the economic expense and improve the compu-
tational efﬁciency without deterioration. Second, we will use
generative adversarial networks to enlarge the size of training
data to increase the model’s performance.
REFERENCES
[1] “Nhtsa report(accessed on 4 august 2021).” [Online]. Available:
https://www.nhtsa.gov
[2] J. Yu, S. Park, S. Lee, and M. Jeon, “Driver drowsiness detection using
condition-adaptive representation learning framework,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 4206–
4218, 2019.
[3] Y. S. S. E. Viswapriya, Singamsetti Balabalaji, “A machine-learning
approach for driver-drowsiness detection based on eye-state,” INTER-
NATIONAL JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING RESEARCH & TECHNOL-
OGY (IJERT), vol. 10, April 2021.
[4] M. M. Hasan, C. N. Watling, and G. S. Larue, “Physiological signal-
based drowsiness detection using machine learning: Singular and hybrid
signal approaches,” Journal of Safety Research, 2021.
[5] D. K. D. K.Mirunalini, “Drowsiness detection using deep neural
network,” Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education,
vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 317–326, 2021.
[6] M. Gromer, D. Salb, T. Walzer, N. M. Madrid, and R. Seepold, “Ecg
sensor for detection of driver’s drowsiness,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 159, pp. 1938–1946, 2019, knowledge-Based and Intelligent Infor-
mation & Engineering Systems: Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference KES2019.
[7] M. Zhu, H. Li, J. Chen, M. Kamezaki, Z. Zhang, Z. Hua, and S. Sugano,
“Eeg-based system using deep learning and attention mechanism for
driver drowsiness detection,” in 2021 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Sympo-
sium Workshops (IV Workshops), 2021, pp. 280–286.
[8] M. Song, L. Li, J. Guo, T. Liu, S. Li, Y. Wang, Qurat ul ain, and
J. Wang, “A new method for muscular visual fatigue detection using
electrooculogram,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 58,
p. 101865, 2020.
[9] L. R. Femilia Hardina Caryn, “Driver drowsiness detection based on
drivers’ physical behaviours: A systematic literature review,” Computer
Engineering and Applications, vol. 10, no. 3, 2021.
[10] H. U. R. Siddiqui, A. A. Saleem, R. Brown, B. Bademci, E. Lee,
F. Rustam, and S. Dudley, “Non-invasive driver drowsiness detection
system,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, 2021.
[11] L. Thulasimani, P. P, and P. S P, “Real time driver drowsiness detection
using opencv and facial landmarks,” Int. J. of Aquatic Science, vol. 12,
no. 2, pp. 4297–4314, 2021.
[12] S. Bakheet and A. Al-Hamadi, “A framework for instantaneous driver
drowsiness detection based on improved hog features and na¨ıve bayesian
classiﬁcation,” Brain Sciences, vol. 11, p. 240, 02 2021.
[13] A. A. Jordan, A. Pegatoquet, A. Castagnetti, J. Raybaut, and P. Le Coz,
“Deep learning for eye blink detection implemented at the edge,” IEEE
Embedded Systems Letters, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 130–133, 2021.
[14] T. Vesselenyi, S. Moca, A. Rus, T. Mitran, and B. T˘ataru, “Driver
drowsiness detection using ANN image processing,” IOP Conference
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 252, p. 012097, oct
2017.
[15] M. Ngxande, J.-R. Tapamo, and M. Burke, “Bias remediation in driver
drowsiness detection systems using generative adversarial networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 55 592–55 601, 2020.
[16] Z. Li, C. Liukui, J. Peng, and Y. Wu, “Automatic detection of driver
fatigue using driving operation information for transportation safety,”
Sensors, vol. 17, p. 1212, 05 2017.
[17] S. Said, S. Alkork, T. Beyrouthy, M. Hassan, O. E. Abdellatif, and
M. F. Abdraboo, “Real Time Eye Tracking and Detection- A Driving
Assistance System,” Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering
Systems Journal, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 446–454, 2018.
[18] F. You, X. Li, Y. Gong, H. Wang, and H. Li, “A real-time driving
drowsiness detection algorithm with individual differences considera-
tion,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 179 396–179 408, 2019.
[19] R. Tamanani, R. Muresan, and A. Al-Dweik, “Estimation of driver
vigilance status using real-time facial expression and deep learning,”
IEEE Sensors Letters, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1–4, 2021.
[20] Z. X. Xu Q Zhu Z, Ge H Zhang Z, “Effective face detector based on
yolov5 and superresolution reconstruction.” Comput Math Methods Med.
2021, Published 2021 Nov 16.
[21] D. Qi, W. Tan, Q. Yao, and J. Liu, “Yolo5face: Why reinventing a face
detector,” 2022.
[22] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
formers for image recognition at scale,” CoRR, vol. abs/2010.11929,
2020.
[23] H. Dong, L. Zhang, and B. Zou, “Exploring vision transformers for
polarimetric sar image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, pp. 1–1, 2021.
[24] P. Deng, K. Xu, and H. Huang, “When cnns meet vision transformer:
A joint framework for remote sensing scene classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[25] Y. Bazi, L. Bashmal, M. M. A. Rahhal, R. A. Dayil, and N. A. Ajlan,
“Vision transformers for remote sensing image classiﬁcation,” Remote
Sensing, vol. 13, no. 3, 2021.
[26] R. Ghoddoosian, M. Galib, and V. Athitsos, “A realistic dataset and
baseline temporal model for early drowsiness detection,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
[27] S. Mittal, S. Gupta, Sagar, A. Shamma, I. Sahni, and N. Thakur, “Driver
drowsiness detection using machine learning and image processing,” in
2021 9th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies
and Optimization (Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO), 2021, pp.
1–8.
[28] A.-C. Phan, N.-H.-Q. Nguyen, T.-N. Trieu, and T.-C. Phan, “An efﬁcient
approach for detecting driver drowsiness based on deep learning,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 18, 2021.
[29] S.-H. L. Ching-Hua Weng, Ying-Hsiu Lai, “Driver drowsiness detection
via a hierarchical temporal deep belief network,” In Asian Conference
on Computer Vision Workshop on Driver Drowsiness Detection from
Video, Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2016.

Ghanta Sai Krishna currently pursuing bachelor’s
degree in Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
at International Institute of Information Technology
Naya Raipur. He is a passionate machine learning re-
searcher who is more inclined towards implementing
end-to-end deep learning architectures, particularly
based on computer vision. He has proﬁcient com-
mand on various deep learning architectures, training
artefacts, ML model optimization, CV, NLP, statis-
tical modelling and ML mathematical methods. He
had completed various online certiﬁcation courses
like data analysis in python, machine learning in python offered by IBM.
He is currently working on interpreting and building the research projects
in the domain of modern deep learning for real-time and software deﬁned
networking with ML.
Kundrapu Supriya currently pursuing Bachelor of
Technology in Computer Science and Engineering
at International Institute of Information Technology,
Naya Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. She is passionate
about human-centric machine learning architectures
and their impact on business and research trans-
formation. She had specialized in deep learning,
and computer vision libraries such as scikit-learn,
TensorFlow, Pytorch, OpenCV and OpenAI gym.
Working in a fast-paced environment, rapid ideation,
and development of AI-based software are a few of
her distinguishing characteristics. She is keenly interested in research projects
based on modern machine learning in computer vision, natural language
processing and network security.
Jai Vardhan ’18 grew up in Hyderabad and is
currently enrolled at IIIT Naya Raipur in the sec-
ond year of his Bachelor’s degree programme in
Computer Science and Engineering. In 11th grade,
Jai was the school’s vice captain, and he deserved
to be a leader. He’s a key member of Shutterbug,
a photography group at IIIT Naya Raipur that has
helped capture a number of high-quality bespoke
datasets. He earned a badge in the Learn to Earn
Cloud Security Challenge after completing a python
course that culminated in a real-time project. He’s
now working on a project that uses Vision Transformers to detect damaged
leaves.
Mallikharjuna Rao K currently working as Assis-
tant Professor in the department of Data Science
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence at International Institute
of Information Technology Naya Raipur (IIIT Naya
Raipur), Chhattisgarh, India. He obtained bachelor’s
degree in Information Science and Technology Engi-
neering from Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur,
Andhra Pradesh, India in 2004. Then obtained mas-
ter’s degree in Computer Science from Jawaharlal
Nehru Technological University Hyderabad, India
in 2010, and obtained Ph.D. in Computer Science
and Engineering from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Hyderabad,
India in 2018. He received best researcher award from VIT-AP University for
2019 & amp; 2020. He published 2 Indian patents and 15+ research papers.
He was the convener for national workshop on Data Science and Big Data
Analytics which was funded by DST, Govt. of India. He chaired sessions
in various international/national conferences. He completed many online
certiﬁcation courses in Python, Software and Agile practices from Coursera
offered by Google, University of Michigan, and University of Alberta. He
has more than 16+ years of teaching and 9+ years of research experience in
Engineering Institutions like VIT-AP University, GITAM University, SVECW,
etc. He is editorial member and reviewer of various peer-reviewed journals
which are SCI/SCOPUS indexed like IET Software, JCS, IJECE, IJCS, BEEI,
IJSER. He is a program committee member of many international confer-
ences like ICCIDE2021, ACSTY2021, SOFE2021, CSITA2021, SEAS2021,
JSE2020 He is currently working on Imbalanced data and Data privacy in the
application domains of Health Care, Smart cities, Financial, Agriculture and
Social data analysis. He is an IEEE Member, life member in CSI, IAENG
and AMIE.
