Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
Samantha Visbeek
SamanthaVisbeek@hotmail.com
RiskQuest
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Erman Acar∗
e.acar@uva.nl
Universiteit van Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Floris den Hengst∗
f.den.hengst@vu.nl
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
ABSTRACT
There is a growing demand for explainable, transparent, and data-
driven models within the domain of fraud detection. Decisions made
by the fraud detection model need to be explainable in the event of
a customer dispute. Additionally, the decision-making process in
the model must be transparent to win the trust of regulators, ana-
lysts, and business stakeholders. At the same time, fraud detection
solutions can benefit from data due to the noisy and dynamic nature
of fraud detection and the availability of large historical data sets.
Finally, fraud detection is notorious for its class imbalance: there
are typically several orders of magnitude more legitimate transac-
tions than fraudulent ones. In this paper, we present Deep Symbolic
Classification (DSC), an extension of the Deep Symbolic Regression
framework to classification problems. DSC casts classification as a
search problem in the space of all analytic functions composed of a
vocabulary of variables, constants, and operations and optimizes
for an arbitrary evaluation metric directly. The search is guided by a
deep neural network trained with reinforcement learning. Because
the functions are mathematical expressions that are in closed-form
and concise, the model is inherently explainable both at the level of
a single classification decision and at the model’s decision process
level. Furthermore, the class imbalance problem is successfully ad-
dressed by optimizing for metrics that are robust to class imbalance
such as the F1 score. This eliminates the need for problematic over-
sampling and undersampling techniques that plague traditional
approaches. Finally, the model allows to explicitly balance between
the prediction accuracy and the explainability. An evaluation on the
PaySim data set demonstrates competitive predictive performance
with state-of-the-art models, while surpassing them in terms of
explainability. This establishes DSC as a promising model for fraud
detection systems.
KEYWORDS
Fraud Detection, Classification, Deep Symbolic Regression, Deep
Reinforcement Learning
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the number of mobile payments has increased dra-
matically due to the popularity of e-Commerce, the widespread use
of mobile devices, and the COVID-19 pandemic. A corresponding
increase in mobile transaction fraud has been observed [5]. Transac-
tion fraud is a major challenge for the financial industry and results
in monetary losses for financial institutions, account holders, and
business owners. To address this issue, banks use fraud detection
systems (FDS) to identify fraudulent transactions automatically and
make real-time decisions on accepting or blocking a transaction.
∗Authors contributed equally to this research.
Deep learning has shown remarkable results in many application
domains, including fraud detection [1, 15, 27]. However, a major
drawback of these models is their lack of transparency. Their black-
box nature makes it difficult to justify a single decision, let alone
explain their overall decision-making processes. Understanding
these is necessary because (i) frauds need not only be detected, but
the opportunity for fraud needs to be mitigated with, e.g., more
stringent security measures, and (ii) the nature of fraud detection
changes daily: new types of fraud are developed, whereas existing
types fall out of favor or become impossible due to novel security
measures. Furthermore, according to the European Union’s 2018
General Data Protection Regulation [11], financial institutions are
required to justify their decisions to legal authorities and customers.
These requirements highlight the need for inherently transparent
and explainable models.
Explainable AI has been gaining attention in recent years, with
one area of research being Symbolic Regression (SR). SR aims to
find analytical (concise, closed-form) expressions that describe func-
tional dependencies in a data set. Since an expression can be under-
stood simply by inspection, SR can be used to create a model that is
transparent and explainable. Recently, Petersen et al. [26] proposed
Deep Symbolic Regression (DSR), an approach to SR based on deep
reinforcement learning. In DSR, a recurrent neural network (RNN)
is trained with deep reinforcement learning on a task-specific re-
ward function to generate expressions with high predictive power
and low complexity. DSR effectively leverages gradient-based deep
learning to capture complex relationships in large data sets that are
nevertheless easily described with an analytical function.
In this paper, we propose extensions to the DSR framework for
the fraud detection problem. The resulting Deep Symbolic Classifi-
cation (DSC) approach extends DSR with: the addition of a sigmoid
layer to the output of the expressions to turn regression into bi-
nary classification, the incorporation of a threshold-based decision
mechanism, and a reward function based on an accuracy metric for
class-imbalanced problems.
Our approach results in a novel framework for fraud detection,
characterized by the following strengths:
(1) robust predictive performance from large-scale, high-dimensional
data with the use of deep reinforcement learning,
(2) analytical expressions that can be transformed into a concise
set of rules and with explanations at both the decision- and
the model levels,
(3) intrinsically robust to highly imbalanced data without the
need for problematic techniques like over- or undersampling,
(4) explicitly trading off predictive power and explainability,
(5) expressive power to capture non-monotonic and non-linear
relationships without an excessive number of polynomial
terms or complex neural network architectures.
arXiv:2312.00586v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2023

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
We train and evaluate DSC on the PaySim data set [22]. We
compare our approach to de facto industry standards, including
XGBoost [12] and show comparable predictive performance. Addi-
tionally, we evaluate the explainability of the expression obtained
along two axes. Firstly, we assess whether the expression aligns with
domain knowledge with an expert from the field, and find that the
expression can be understood successfully. Secondly, we investigate
the trade-off between explainability and predictive performance
by constructing a Pareto front of performance and complexity of
obtained expressions. We find that more complex expressions do
not necessarily yield better predictice performance. Finally, in an
investigation of the relation between expression complexity and
overfitting, we find that the approach does not suffer from overfit-
ting for simple and more complex expressions.
2
RELATED WORK
Explainable Models. Explainable AI has gained increasing atten-
tion in recent years, particularly in fields with high societal stakes
such as finance and medicine [18]. While models focusing solely
on predictive performance keep surpassing the state of the art,
their black-box nature prevents adoption. This is especially seen
in application domains where accountability is a prerequisite and
decision-making based on black-box models can have harmful con-
sequences [32, 34]. To address this issue, the field of explainable AI
has emerged [20, 23, 29, 33]. This field focuses on approaches that
involve approximating a secondary model to explain the predictions
made by the original black-box model. However, these approaches
may be insufficiently reliable, robust, or hard to interpret them-
selves, which has motivated the study of inherently explainable
methods [2, 10, 17, 28].
Furthermore, the implementation of the European Union’s Gen-
eral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in 2018 has given citizens
the ‘right to explanation’ of automated decision-making models
that can significantly affect them [11]. Banks often make these de-
cisions as part of their fraud prevention efforts. One example is the
use of FDSs to block suspicious payment transactions in order to
reduce losses and ensure the satisfaction of law-abiding customers.
According to Nesvijevskaia et al. [25], bank institutions must justify
their actions to customers, anti-money laundering authorities, and
legal organizations. Since fraud detection algorithms have legal,
operational, strategic and ethical constraints, banks must balance
explainability with predictive performance [25]. Our approach al-
lows for explicitly selecting a solution that is Pareto-optimal w.r.t.
explainability and performance.
Symbolic Regression. The field of study known as Symbolic Re-
gression (SR) aims to obtain analytical expressions that describe
functional dependencies of a data set [9]. Formally, given a set of
characteristics 𝑋and target values 𝒚, with 𝑋𝑖∈R𝑛and 𝑦𝑖∈R,
SR aims to find a function 𝑓: R𝑛→R that best describes the
data set, where 𝑓is a closed-form analytical expression such that
𝑓(𝑋) = 𝒚+ 𝜖. Essentially, the SR problem is a discrete combinato-
rial search for the optimal function 𝑓∗that minimizes the distance
metric 𝐷(𝑓(𝑋),𝒚):
𝑓∗= argmin
𝑓
𝐷(𝑓(𝑋),𝒚).
(1)
The function 𝑓is an analytical expression that can be interpreted
by inspection. As a result, SR is frequently used to produce models
that are transparent and explainable [18].
Conventionally, SR has emerged within the field of Genetic Pro-
gramming (GP) [18]. First introduced by Koza [16], the combina-
torial search problem is addressed with an algorithm inspired by
the Darwinian principle of natural selection and genetic recombi-
nation. This process begins with the evaluation of a population of
candidate solutions. Each candidate consists of a syntax tree where
the leaf nodes represent features, and the internal nodes represent
operators. A syntax tree represents an analytical expression and is
evaluated on the training data set. In this evaluation, a predictive
performance metric such as accuracy corresponds to the notion of
fitness in Darwinian terminology. The fittest candidates are selected
for reproduction, where their subtrees are recombined, with the
goal of creating even more fit candidates. Additionally, each node
has a probability of randomly mutating, i.e. changing the node’s
operator. The process can be seen as a version of combinatioral
discrete search for an accurate expression by training on a sufficient
yet tractable number of generations.
Quite recently, Sipper [30] showed that GP-based SR often out-
performs the top machine learning methods in classification tasks,
highlighting its potential for achieving high performance. How-
ever, there are also concerns regarding the use of GP for SR, one
of which is its sensitivity to hyperparameter configurations, which
can result in suboptimal performance. Additionally, GP has been
found to be computationally demanding and may not scale to large
high-dimensional data sets with complex relationships [26].
Deep Symbolic Regression. To address the limitations of SR with
GP, a recent work by [26] has proposed a gradient-based approach
to SR based on RNN and reinforcement learning, known as Deep
Symbolic Regression. During training, an RNN produces analytical
expressions that are then evaluated on how well they describe
the data set, a measure called “fitness”. This fitness is linked to a
reward that is used to train the RNN through a risk-seeking policy
gradient algorithm. The RNN adjusts the probabilities of sampling
an expression according to its corresponding reward. This results
in expressions that describe the data set relatively well. The authors
demonstrate that DSR outperforms the included baselines on a set
of benchmark problems, including Eureqa, which is considered the
gold standard for symbolic regression [26].
Building on the foundation laid by DSR, Mundhenk et al. [24]
have proposed a hybrid approach that combines GP and gradient-
based methods. In this enhanced framework, the RNN initially
generates a set of expressions (or candidate solutions). Subsequently,
GP is employed as an inner optimization loop to facilitate selection,
recombination, and mutation on these candidates. This enables
the exploration of a more diverse solution space and enables the
algorithm to escape local optima more effectively. After this GP step,
the fitness of the resulting expressions is reassessed, and the RNN
is then used again to generate a fresh batch of candidate solutions.
This process continues iteratively, with the GP component serving
as the inner optimization loop, while the neural-guided gradient-
based approach operates as the outer loop.
The hybrid approach in this study combines the strengths of
both methods to enhance their respective performance. First, the

Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
integration of the RNN trained with reinforcement learning allows
for improved restarts in the GP process, overcoming the limitations
of random restarts that are normally associated with GP. Second,
the inclusion of GP enables a more diverse exploration of the solu-
tion space, reducing the risk of being trapped in local optima. The
authors demonstrate the superior performance of the hybrid DSR
approach compared to vanilla DSR in various benchmark problems
[24].
In this study, we present a novel framework called Deep Sym-
bolic Classification, which is a modified version of hybrid DSR,
tailored specifically for the binary classification task of fraud detec-
tion. Our proposed approach incorporates a sigmoid layer into the
prediction mechanism, enabling it to produce a probabilistic output
suitable for classification. Additionally, we utilize the F1 score as
the reward function to address the prevalent issue of high class
imbalance often encountered in fraud detection scenarios.
Uninterpretable Fraud Detection In 2022, Hajek et al. [12] pro-
posed an XGBoost-based framework that was empirically shown to
achieve state of the art (SOTA) performance on the PaySim data set.
XGBoost, short for Extreme Gradient Boosting, is a decision tree
ensemble method that combines multiple ML models to produce
superior performance relative to that of a singular model [7]. It is
based on the principle of sequentially adding weaker models to
correct for the errors made by previous models, utilizing gradient
descent to optimize the model’s performance. However, one of its
primary limitations is its lack of explainability, which makes it
unsuitable as an FDS in practical scenarios.
In the same study, several supervised models with varying accu-
racy and levels of explainability were used as baselines for compar-
ative analysis. These include (in decreasing order of explainability
[25]) 𝑘-Nearest Neighbors (𝑘-NN), Random Forest (RF) and Sup-
port Vector Machines (SVM). Their findings indicated that 𝑘-NN
and SVM are ineffective for fraud detection due to their inability
to address the class imbalance. Conversely, RF performed excep-
tionally well on the data set, yet it is still considered a black-box
model because of the high number of deep decision trees generated
within it. Although some strategies have been proposed to offer
the required explainability for understanding the RF model [3], it is
advisable to employ models that are inherently explainable instead,
as previously highlighted in this section.
In this work, we conduct a comparative analysis between DSC
and the aforementioned models, assessing their respective predic-
tive performances. This enables us to illustrate how DSC measures
up against models with varying degrees of explainability, as well
as its performance against the state of the art on the test set. Note
that the pre-processing of our data set differs from the procedure
adopted in the work of Hajek et al. [12]. Therefore, we reimplement
these models according to the hyperparameters specified in the
original paper to maintain consistency in our analysis.
3
METHOD
3.1
Model implementation
We implement hybrid DSR as described in Mundhenk et al. [24],
and adjust it to make it suitable for classification problems. In
this subsection, we provide a comprehensive description of our
methodology for generating analytical expressions using a RNN,
converting these expressions into classification models, and training
the RNN using reinforcement learning techniques 1. Figure 1 details
the steps described below.
3.1.1
Generating expressions. Each expression is represented by a
binary syntax tree, following the approach as proposed by Koza [16].
Each node in this tree is labeled with a token from a library of tokens.
The library contains tokens that represent input features, constants,
and mathematical operators. All leaf nodes of the syntax tree are
labeled with tokens representing features or constants, and internal
nodes represent mathematical operators. These operators can be
unary (logarithm, sign, square root, etc.) or binary (summation,
difference, multiplication, etc.). Within the algorithm, a syntax tree
is represented as a list corresponding to a pre-order traversal of
the tree, see Appendix A for a visualisation. Since the arity of each
mathematical operator is known upfront, a list of tokens represents
a single, unique tree. The list representation brings the benefit
of compatibility with existing neural network architectures that
accept sequential input, including RNNs, LTSM-based models, and
transformers [19].
The lists are generated from left to right, where each element is
sampled from a probability distribution over all available features
and mathematical operators. The probability distribution for sam-
pling element 𝑖is conditioned on the previously sampled elements
𝑖−1,𝑖−2, .., 0. This conditional dependence is generated by an RNN,
the outputs of which are passed through a softmax layer to obtain
probabilities for each of the operators and features. Rather than
using the current list as input, the RNN is only given the parent
and sibling nodes of the previously sampled element as input. This
is because the list does not capture the hierarchical structure of its
syntax tree, as it was formed by preorder traversal.
In order to generate plausible expressions that make sense in
the context of describing the data set, the syntax tree is subject to
certain constraints: (1)the length of the sampled expression is bound
by predefined minimum and maximum values; (2) it is enforced that
each pair of leaf nodes that descend from the same parent node, should
represent at least one feature: this prevents forming expressions of
constants; (3) the tree has some constraints to ensure expressions
that make sense mathematically: unary operators cannot have chil-
dren that are the inverse of the operator, and trigonometric operators
cannot have children that are trigonometric operators themselves.
The process of generating expressions with RNN is visualized in
Figure 3.
3.1.2
Inner optimization loop. Entering the inner GP loop of our
process, the expressions 𝜏𝑅𝑁𝑁generated by the RNN serve as the
initial population 𝜏(0)
𝐺𝑃for the GP algorithm. With each iteration 𝑖, a
new population of expressions 𝜏(𝑖+1)
𝐺𝑃
is systematically constructed
through processes of selection, recombination, and mutation. This
iterative procedure continues until the specified number of genera-
tions, 𝑆, is reached. The highest-performing expressions of the final
population 𝜏(𝑆)
𝐺𝑃, are selected and subsequently used for gradient
update.
1Source code available at https://github.com/samanthav24/DSC_Fraud_Detection

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
Library of 
tokens L
RNN
𝜏i 
repeat until max 
expression length
𝜏RNN
GP
𝜏GP 
train set
(X, y)
seed 
population
repeat
S times
X
classifications
ŷ = σ(𝜏GP(X))≥ t
reward
 r(y, ŷ)
gradient
∇𝙅risk
y
Figure 1: Train loop for deep symbolic classification. An RNN generates an expression by sampling tokens from a predefined
library of tokens. The resulting expression is used to seed the population of a genetic programming process for further opti-
mizing the expression. After optimization, classifications are generated using a sigmoid 𝜎and a threshold 𝑡. The classifications
are scored with a reward function, e.g. F1 score, which is used to train the RNN in a risk-based gradient estimate.
This hybrid methodology introduced by Mundhenk et al. [24]
effectively combines the advantages of an inner GP-based optimiza-
tion loop with those of an outer gradient-based optimization loop.
The internal loop is similar to the standard GP with random restarts,
with the distinctive addition of the RNN that offers progressively
better starting populations (𝜏𝑅𝑁𝑁= 𝜏(0)
𝐺𝑃) for each successive it-
eration of the outer loop. In the context of the outer loop, the GP
element ensures a more diverse range of expression populations.
This diversity helps avoid being confined to local optima, thus
facilitating a more efficient learning process.
3.1.3
Evaluating expression. Each expression 𝑓is passed through
a sigmoid function 𝜎to produce probabilities that are suitable for
use in this binary classification problem. This allows the expression
to be used to predict the likelihood that a transaction is fraudulent
(1) or legitimate (0). The class prediction ˆ𝑦of a transaction with
corresponding features 𝒙is determined according to the following:
ˆ𝑦=
(
1
if 𝜎(𝑓(𝒙)) ≥𝑡
0
if 𝜎(𝑓(𝒙)) < 𝑡
(2)
where 𝑡is a given threshold. A reward is assigned to the expression,
which corresponds to its performance on the data set. It is conven-
tional in classification problems to minimize the cross-entropy loss
𝐶𝐸to increase the performance of the model. Therefore, we define a
reward function 𝑟𝐶𝐸, which is the normalized inverse cross-entropy
loss with respect to the ground truth classes 𝒚. Specifically,
𝑟𝐶𝐸=
1
1 + 𝐶𝐸(𝒚, ˆ𝒚)
(3)
where we add 1 to the denominator to normalize the reward. How-
ever, a major problem in the domain of fraud detection is the sig-
nificant class imbalance, which often leads to low precision (i.e.,
too many legitimate transactions are incorrectly classified as fraud-
ulent). To address this, a different reward function 𝑟𝐹1 is defined.
This function is based on the F1 score, which directly optimizes the
model’s performance with respect to precision and recall:
𝑟𝐹1 = 2𝑝𝑟
𝑝+ 𝑟
(4)
where 𝑝and 𝑟are respectively the precision and recall score of
the expression on the data set. We conduct a comparison between
the reward functions 𝑟𝐶𝐸and 𝑟𝐹1 based on the performance scores
of the expressions generated using these functions, for different
threshold values 𝑡∈[0.5, 0.9]. In standard logistic regression, the
threshold value is typically set to 0.5. However, due to the issue
of low precision arising from the class imbalance, we increase the
threshold values to improve precision.
The RNN adjusts the probability distribution for sampling ele-
ments with this reward function (a more detailed description of
this process is given in Section 3.1.4). In the context of reinforce-
ment learning, the constituent elements of the environment, actions,
episode, policy, and reward are represented by the parent and sibling
nodes, the sampling of elements, the generation of an expression,
the probability distribution, and the reward function, respectively.
The algorithm terminates after a given number of iterations.
3.1.4
RNN Training. Since the reward function is based on the pre-
dictive power of the generated equation, rather than the parameters
𝜽of the RNN, it is not differentiable with respect to 𝜽. Therefore,
reinforcement learning is used to train the RNN to generate bet-
ter expressions. A naive approach to optimize the policy 𝑝(𝜏|𝜽)
(which is represented by the distribution of samples 𝜏) would be to
use the standard policy gradient objective that aims to maximize
the expected value of the reward. It is important to note that by
maximizing an expectation, the focus is on optimizing the average
performance of the generated expressions. However, in the context
of fraud detection, the ultimate objective is to achieve the best possi-
ble performance of a single expression that is found during training,
as it will be used as the final model. Therefore, the standard policy
gradient objective may not be suitable for this purpose.
Instead, a risk seeking policy gradient objective 𝐽𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝜽;𝜀), is
used to maximize the performance of the highest fraction of sam-
ples 𝜀, at the expense of sacrificing the performance of the other
generated expressions. The risk-seeking policy gradient objective
[26] is defined as
𝐽𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝜽;𝜀) ≡E𝜏∼𝑝(𝜏|𝜽) [𝑅(𝜏)|𝑅(𝜏) ≥𝑅𝜀(𝜽)]
(5)

Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
which aims to increase the reward 𝑅𝜀of the top 𝜀fraction of samples
from the distribution, while disregarding the samples that fall below
this threshold. The gradient of 𝐽𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝜽;𝜀) is then given by
∇𝐽𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝜽;𝜀) =
E𝜏∼𝑝(𝜏|𝜽)

(𝑅(𝜏) −𝑅𝜀(𝜽)) · ∇𝜽𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝜏|𝜽)|𝑅(𝜏) ≥𝑅𝜀(𝜽)

(6)
To compute this, we can use the standard REINFORCE Monte Carlo
estimate [36] with two adjustments. First, instead of using the
expected return of all samples as a baseline, we substituted it with
𝑅𝜀. Second, we only include the top 𝜀fraction of samples from
each batch in the gradient computation. The resulting Monte Carlo
estimate can be expressed as
∇𝐽𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝜽;𝜀) ≈
1
𝜀𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1

𝑅(𝜏(𝑖)) −˜𝑅𝜀(𝜽)

· 1𝑅(𝜏(𝑖) )≥˜𝑅𝜀(𝜽)∇𝜽𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝜏(𝑖) |𝜽)
(7)
where ˜𝑅𝜀is the empirical (1 −𝜀)-quantile of the batch of rewards,
and 1𝑠takes the value 1 if the statement 𝑠is true, and 0 otherwise. In
this implementation, the value of 𝜀is set to 0.05, which is consistent
with the approach taken in [26].
3.2
Data
3.2.1
The PaySim data set. We use the popular PaySim data set [22].
PaySim is a data set of simulated transactions based on proprietary
real transactions [22]. Obtaining a real data set of payment transac-
tions can be difficult due to privacy concerns. To address this issue,
PaySim was developed to provide researchers with a simulated
data set that exhibits statistical properties similar to a real payment
transaction data set, while preserving the confidentiality of the
underlying customer data. The data set contains ~6.3 million trans-
actions over a period of a month and with a fraudulent transaction
rate of 0.13%. Columns represent various attributes associated with
transactions:
• step - unit of time; one step corresponds to one hour of time,
• type - a categorical feature with values: cash-in, cash-out,
debit, payment, or transfer,
• amount - amount of the transaction in local currency,
• nameOrig - name of the customer,
• oldbalanceOrg - customer’s balance before the transaction,
• newbalanceOrig - customer’s balance after the transaction,
• nameDest - name of the recipient,
• oldbalanceDest - recipient’s balance before the transaction,
• newbalanceDest - recipient’s balance after the transaction,
• isFlaggedFraud - an indicator of whether the transaction has
been flagged as fraudulent in the simulation,
• isFraud - an indicator of the transaction being legitimate or
fraudulent,
where the column isFraud represents the target variable, while the
remaining columns are used as features in the DSC model.
3.2.2
Generating additional features. Some of these features re-
quire the inclusion of pre-processing in an analytical expression tar-
geted in this work. The type variable was represented with one-hot
encoding. All other categorical features (nameOrig and nameDest)
were discarded to ensure the explainability of the model. Because
information about individual customers and recipients can be essen-
tial for identifying fraud [4, 35], aggregation features were added
to model the behavior of account holders. These features include
the mean and maximum transaction amounts of the last 3 and 7
transactions of the recipient account. Further analysis of the data
set shows that only 0.15% of the accounts participated in more than
one transaction, compared to 83% of the recipient accounts. There-
fore, the aggregation of the previous 3 and 7 transaction amounts
is limited to the recipient account.
The PaySim data set contains many transactions with nonzero
transaction amounts and before and after balances of zero. These
transactions model accounts at counterparty banks, whose balances
are not known and were imputed with zero. To mitigate this, the
data set is enhanced with two features, externalOrig and exter-
nalDest, which indicate whether both balances before and after the
transaction are zero, respectively, and thus are considered to belong
to an external account. Furthermore, zero balances are imputed
so that oldbalanceOrig is set equal to amount if the customer’s
account is external and newbalanceDest is set equal to amount if
the recipient’s account is external. This method ensures that the
balances are proportional to the transaction amount. The indicator
features externalOrig and externalDest identify such instances and
differentiate between true zeros and zeros due to missing values.
Furthermore, the inclusion of externalOrig and externalDest ensures
that a possible relationship between fraudulent transactions and
the involvement of external banks is properly considered.
The imputation of balances also mitigates a form of data leakage.
A known limitation of the PaySim data set is that a model that
predicts fraud if the transaction amount is equal to oldbalanceOrig
achieves exceptionally high accuracy. This has raised concerns that
the data set might have been generated according to this rule. How-
ever, the authors refute this possibility and assert that transactions
recognized as fraud (as determined by the bank of the original
data set from which these transactions are simulated) are likely
to be canceled [21], resulting in oldbalanceOrig being set to zero.
Therefore, the aforementioned imputation of oldbalanceOrig helps
circumvent this issue of data leakage.
A second form of data leakage was also mitigated in our prepro-
cessing. According to the description of the data set, the isFlagged-
Fraud feature should be True if the transaction amount exceeds
200,000. However, when analyzing the data, it becomes apparent
that this condition is not met and the actual meaning of this vari-
able remains unclear. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that almost
all (99.87%) of the transactions where isFlaggedFraud is True, are
indeed fraudulent. Due to the ambiguity surrounding the interpre-
tation of isFlaggedFraud, this feature is ultimately discarded.
3.2.3
Final preprocessing steps. Some of the baseline models we
use for comparative analysis require balanced training data. To
accommodate this requirement, an additional balanced training set
is generated by randomly undersampling the training data. Details
on preprocessing and all features used can be found in Appendix B.
3.3
Evaluation
We conduct a comparative analysis to assess the predictive per-
formance of DSC in relation to the SOTA XGBoost-based method
and the baseline models and hyperparameters proposed by Hajek

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
Table 1: Complexity of tokens
token 𝜏
complexity 𝑐
+, -, ×, feature, constant
1
÷, square
2
sin, cos
3
exp, log, square-root
4
Table 2: Average F1 scores on the test set. Std between paren-
theses if > 0.00, column-wise best in bold.
method
accuracy
precision
recall
F1 score
RF + RUS
0.93
0.02
0.93
0.03
XGBoost + RUS
0.95
0.02
0.94
0.05
𝑘-NN + RUS
0.94
0.02
0.83
0.03
SVM + RUS
0.95
0.02
0.70
0.03
RF
0.99
0.99
0.67
0.81
XGBoost
0.99
0.98
0.70
0.82
DSC (average)
0.99
0.95 (.01)
0.67
0.78
DSC (best expression)
0.99
0.95
0.67
0.78
et al. [12]. In order to assess the trade-off between expression com-
plexity and predictive performance, we create the set of generated
expressions where no other generated expression is superior in both
complexity and performance [31]. Such a set is typically known as
the Pareto front. We define the complexity 𝐶of an expression 𝑓of
length 𝑇with sampled tokens 𝜏𝑖as
𝐶(𝑓) =
𝑇
∑︁
𝑖=0
𝑐(𝜏𝑖)
(8)
where 𝑐(𝜏𝑖) is the complexity of a token 𝜏𝑖. The complexity of
different types of tokens is taken from Petersen et al. [26] and
reproduced in Table 1.
The optimal expression can then be determined via the elbow
method, i.e. by selecting the point at which adding more complexity
to the expression does not result in a sufficient increase in the F1
score. This prevents overfitting and ensures that the expressions
are not overly complex, thereby preserving explainability.
4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 2 lists the performance in the test set averaged over 5 runs:
the baseline classification models with and without Random Un-
dersampling (RUS) (see Section 2) is compared to the best DSC
configuration, i.e. with 𝑟𝐹1 and a threshold value of 0.8 and the best
expression obtained by DSC (Equation 9).
Table 2 indicates that undersampling (RUS) does not improve
results. While models trained with RUS demonstrate high recall
rates, their precision values are notably low, leading to low F1 scores.
This observation suggests that an excessive amount of information
is lost and that models overfit to the small number of examples in
the train set when using undersampling. We note that 𝑘-NN and
SVM demonstrate effective training only when applying RUS to the
train set. Otherwise, the training time for these models took more
than 50 hours and was aborted, highlighting the complexities and
resource requirements associated with highly imbalanced data sets.
In terms of F1 score, DSC demonstrates comparable performance
to RF and the SOTA XGBoost model without RUS. The relatively
small drop in performance compared to these baselines stems from
a drop in precision and not accuracy. The precision for DSC can be
considered acceptable and signifies that a relatively low number of
legitimate transactions is incorrectly classified as fraudulent. The
DSC model provides inherent explainability at only a limited drop
in predictive performance, making it an attractive choice for the
fraud detection problem.
4.1
Explainability
The best average performance was obtained with 𝑟𝐹1 and threshold
𝑡= 0.8. However, the best individual run was trained at 𝑡= 0.7.
This expression has comparable predictive performance and lower
complexity. Figure 2 shows the F1 scores of the Pareto front of the
best run. We refer to the expression 𝑓with complexity level 𝑥, by
𝑓𝐶=𝑥. The figure indicates that the best expression, based on the
F1 score, is either 𝑓𝐶=9 or 𝑓𝐶=13. When analyzing the overfitting,
one might be inclined to favor 𝑓𝐶=9 over 𝑓𝐶=13 as the performance
is similar at lower complexity. However, when evaluating the ex-
pressions on the test set, it becomes apparent that 𝑓𝐶=9 yields a
score of 0.76, while 𝑓𝐶=13 yields a score of 0.78. Given that 𝑓𝐶=13
produces a higher F1 score on the test set, this suggests that there
is no overfitting for this expression.
The key consideration now is whether the observed increase
in performance justifies the corresponding increase in complexity,
potentially affecting the explainability of the model. The expression
that demonstrated the highest performance is given by:
𝑓𝐶=13 =
√︁
externalDest + type_cash-out
· (amount −maxDest7 + type_transfer),
(9)
where maxDest7 denotes the maximum amount among the last
7 transactions (including the current amount), associated with a
particular recipient. This expression can be readily transformed
into a straightforward decision rule suitable for deployment as a de-
tection model (see Appendix D for details): classify a transaction
as fraudulent, if
• type = transfer, and
• externalDest = True, and
• amount - maxDest7 > -0.15
classify a transaction as legitimate; otherwise
Compared to the best expression 𝑓𝐶=13 with 𝑓𝐶=9, the key differ-
ence is the absence of the square root operator and the substitution
of maxDest7 with maxDest3. However, the decision rule derived
from the best expression eliminates the square-root operator, mak-
ing both expressions equally explainable. The only remaining dis-
parity lies in the utilization of either the maxDest7 or maxDest3
feature. Therefore, we consider 𝑓𝐶=13 as the optimal expression.
The absence of weighted features and the lack of periodic rela-
tionships in this expression are somewhat unexpected. One plausi-
ble explanation for this finding is that the PaySim data set covers
a single month, while fraudulent behavior in general exhibits sea-
sonality over a longer period of time [8, 13]. Hence, the complex

Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
periodicity of real-world fraud may not be present in the data
set. Furthermore, we observe that the features type_cash-out and
type_transfer are present in the optimal expression. Exploratory
Data Analysis confirms that all fraudulent transactions in the data
set indeed fall under these two types. However, when examining the
subsequent decision model derived from the expression, it becomes
apparent that the model does not detect fraudulent transactions of
the type "cash-out". Although the model acknowledges the signifi-
cance of this type, it is likely that further training is necessary to
effectively capture this specific relationship.
4.2
Expert Interpretation
We participated in a discussion with a senior expert in fraud detec-
tion employed at a large international bank based in the Nether-
lands. Our discussion focused on whether our findings align with
expert knowledge and the potential applicability of our approach
within the bank the expert is currently employed, considering both
its performance and explainability. The expression’s simplicity and
ease of interpretation make it more manageable than the complex
set of rules and large-scale random forests that are typically in
place. Moreover, the selected features and their relations within
the expression are logically coherent. For example, the inclusion
of the feature "type=transfer" aligns with criminal behavior. Trans-
fers are popular for executing fraud, in contrast to other types of
transactions such as payments. Similarly, the feature "externalDest
= True" is informative. Specifically, in the event that a transaction
is classified as fraudulent by an FDS, the bank may need to retrieve
funds. The process of retrieving funds becomes more challenging
if the transaction involves an external bank, compared to internal
transfers. Fraudsters are well aware of this distinction and can ex-
ploit vulnerabilities in the system by diverting money to external
institutions.
Furthermore, the requirement that the transaction amount must
exceed the highest value among the previous six transactions, or dif-
fer by no more than 0.15, exemplifies an adaptation by criminals to
evade detection. This adaptive behavior arises from the fact that ear-
lier detection models successfully captured and flagged transactions
that adhered to this particular behavior2. In response, fraudsters
devised a new method known as "smurfing", in which multiple
transactions with small amounts are used to avoid detection by the
system [6].
Finally, in a hypothetical scenario where DSC demonstrates com-
parable performance on the expert’s bank’s internal data set, it
would be regarded as a valuable addition to the FDS. The hypothet-
ically adequate performance of DSC and its simplicity justify its
consideration for use as a component in an FDS. One could also
imagine that DSC could play a role in devising mitigations for new
types of fraud.
4.3
Impact of Hyperparameters
Table 3 lists the predictive performance of DSC with different re-
ward functions 𝑟𝐶𝐸and 𝑟𝐹1, for various thresholds, averaged over
5 runs. It is important to note that the models were trained on the
2It is important to acknowledge that the insights are derived from the PaySim data set
do not necessarily reflect current fraudulent behavior.
Table 3: Mean (std) scores of DSC with different reward func-
tions and thresholds over 5 runs, column-wise best in bold.
reward
𝑡
accuracy
precision
recall
F1 score
𝑟𝐶𝐸
0.5
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.01)
0.52 (.05)
0.68 (.04)
0.6
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.00)
0.50 (.00)
0.66 (.00)
0.7
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.01)
0.53 (.07)
0.69 (.05)
0.8
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.01)
0.55 (.07)
0.70 (.05)
0.9
0.99 (.00)
0.95 (.03)
0.59 (.08)
0.72 (.05)
𝑟𝐹1
0.5
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.00)
0.50 (.00)
0.66 (.00)
0.6
0.99 (.00)
0.98 (.00)
0.50 (.00)
0.66 (.00)
0.7
0.99 (.00)
0.97 (.01)
0.56 (.05)
0.71 (.03)
0.8
0.99 (.00)
0.95 (.01)
0.67 (.00)
0.78 (.00)
0.9
0.99 (.00)
0.94 (.03)
0.66 (.01)
0.78 (.01)
imbalanced data set and used the same threshold for both training
and testing.
When using 𝑟𝐶𝐸as the reward function, there appears to be a
slight increase in the F1 score for higher thresholds. This increase
is mostly explained by higher recall. However, in general, the recall
score is relatively low: only a limited number of fraudulent transac-
tions are detected. In contrast, the positive relationship between the
threshold and the F1 score becomes more pronounced for 𝑟𝐹1. Al-
though precision slightly decreases, reward increases significantly,
leading to an increase in the F1 score. This trend continues until a
threshold of 𝑡= 0.8. Using a threshold of 0.8 yields a recall rate of
0.67, i.e. two thirds of the fraudulent transactions are detected.
The difference in performance when using 𝑟𝐶𝐸or 𝑟𝐹1 can be ex-
plained as follows: the fraudulent minority class carries less weight
in the calculation of the normalized inverse cross-entropy loss, re-
sulting in minimal improvements. On the other hand, by directly
optimizing the F1 score, the model ensures that the minority class
is not neglected, as both precision and recall have equal importance
in the calculation of the reward.
The training and testing phases use the same threshold and one
might therefore assume that the threshold should not have a signif-
icant impact as feature weights can be adjusted accordingly. How-
ever, the optimization of constants includes an inner optimization
loop. This loop forms a computational bottleneck. This is mitigated
by faster convergence in the case of higher decision thresholds.
We believe that longer run times may have resulted in compara-
ble scores for lower decision thresholds. A higher threshold thus
serves as a practical approach to reducing computational resources
without sacrificing predictive performance or model simplicity.
Furthermore, we note that recall increases with higher thresh-
olds, while the precision remains stable or even decreases for 𝑟𝐹1.
A high decision threshold is a common strategy to favor precision
when traditional machine learning models are used on imbalanced
data. However, in this particular case, the class imbalance is sub-
stantial, with only 0.13% of the transactions being fraudulent. As a
result, the model may exhibit overconfidence in the legitimate class,
causing the sigmoid function to output probabilities that are lower
than they should be. High decision thresholds force the model to
predict a larger proportion of fraudulent transactions and increase

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
Figure 2: Pareto front of predictive performance and com-
plexity by the best DSC run (𝑡= 0.7, 𝑟𝐹1).
the recall rate.
4.4
Limitations
Despite the promise shown by our approach, several limitations
require further discussion. First, our data pre-processing and pre-
vention of data leakage introduced noise into the aggregated fea-
tures. This approach may not accurately reflect genuine behavioral
patterns, and thus a larger data set could potentially improve per-
formance. However, the computational expense of DSC raises prac-
tical considerations. Second, the representativeness of our data is a
concern. The PaySim data set, simulated from real mobile money
transaction may not be representative of transaction patterns glob-
ally. This, however, is a common issue in fraud detection research as
the availability of realistic data is limited due to considerations on
privacy, competitivenes and systemic risk. Additionally, while our
model should adapt well to evolving tactics of fraudsters we did not
evaluate our approach for this due to data set limitations. Third, in
our pre-processing of balance data, we favoured mitigating leakage
and the integrity of the transaction amounts at the cost of accu-
racy with respect to balance amount. Fourth, due to the substantial
runtime of experiments, we did not perform full cross-validation.
We did perform multiple runs with varying random seeds to en-
sure robustness of results, however. Future studies should consider
cross-validation to potentially enhance the robustness of the results
even further. Finally, DSC demonstrated a higher variance in per-
formance relative to benchmark models such as RF and XGBoost.
As our proposed framework incorporates probabilistic components,
some runs may escape local optima more quickly than others. This
suggests that our approach can benefit from existing approaches
to escaping local optima that have already been adopted by estab-
lished techniques, including those included in the benchmark. Due
to the relatively high computational expense of experimentation,
we leave these improvements as future work.
5
CONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced Deep Symbolic Classification, a novel
framework for explainable fraud detection in financial transactions.
Our approach involves training a deep symbolic regression algo-
rithm to generate analytical expressions with a classification-based
reward function. We incorporate a sigmoid layer and a tunable
decision threshold to turn regression into classification. By using
the F1 score as the reward function instead and by setting a decision
threshold of 0.8, we have effectively mitigated the challenges asso-
ciated with high class imbalance, a key issue in the fraud detection
domain. By taking the class imbalance problem head on, DSC elim-
inates the need for problematic techniques such as oversampling
or undersampling. The models generated by DSC are transparent
and allow for straightforward inspection of features. In particular,
our analysis has revealed that certain key features align with ex-
pert knowledge about fraudulent transactions. We observed that
transaction type, intra-bank transactions, and the amount of the
transaction relative to the last six transactions of the recipient were
significant factors in determining fraudulent activities.
Our framework facilitates the creation of models with varying
complexity and predictive performance and the creation of a Pareto
front. Analysts and other stakeholders can select the model that
best aligns with their desired trade-off between explainability and
predictive performance from this set of optimal solutions. In our
case study, we found an optimal solution that could be transformed
into a concise decision rule based on only three Boolean variables.
Elaborating further on the aspect of predictive performance, DSC
exhibits slightly lower performance compared to SOTA models on
the PaySim data set. However, DSC achieves precision and recall
scores of 0.95 and 0.67, respectively, indicating a minimal occur-
rence of misclassified legitimate transactions and a notable ability
to detect approximately two thirds of fraudulent transactions. It is
important to note that the SOTA models lack explainability and ex-
hibit only marginally better performance, thus positioning DSC as a
promising model for fraud detection. However, additional research
needs to be done on different data sets and different operators to
provide a definitive conclusion regarding its practical implementa-
tion in industry.
Regarding future directions, several areas can be explored. Firstly,
incorporating relational operators (e.g., ≥, <, ≠) or aggregational op-
erators (e.g., mean, standard deviation, percentiles) in the library of
tokens can help eliminate the need for manual feature engineering.
Additionally, exploring alternatives to the sigmoid function for
mapping expression values to probability spaces could be fruit-
ful. Multilayer Discriminant Classification presents an interesting
option, wherein two expressions are created, one for each class,
and the argmax of their weighted values determine the classifica-
tion [30]. The weights of the features in both expressions directly
optimize the likelihood of each class.
Moreover, the recurrent expression generation process of DSC,
trained via reinforcement learning, lacks parallelization, resulting
in relatively high computation times. A potential solution is to
investigate transformer-based symbolic regression, as introduced
by Kamienny et al. [14], to address this limitation.

Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We kindly thank Wim Tip for sharing his expertise on fraud detec-
tion and the anonymous reviewers for their useful suggestions to
improve on this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Fawaz Khaled Alarfaj, Iqra Malik, Hikmat Ullah Khan, Naif Almusallam, Muham-
mad Ramzan, and Muzamil Ahmed. 2022. Credit Card Fraud Detection Using
State-of-the-Art Machine Learning and Deep Learning Algorithms. IEEE Access
10 (2022), 39700–39715.
[2] David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S. Jaakkola. 2018. On the Robustness of Inter-
pretability Methods. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/on-
the-robustness-of-interpretability-methods/
[3] Massimo Aria, Corrado Cuccurullo, and Agostino Gnasso. 2021. A comparison
among interpretative proposals for Random Forests. Machine Learning with
Applications 6 (2021), 100094. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mlwa.2021.100094
[4] Alejandro Correa Bahnsen, Djamila Aouada, Aleksandar Stojanovic, and Björn
Ottersten. 2016. Feature engineering strategies for credit card fraud detection.
Expert Systems with Applications 51 (2016), 134–142.
[5] Samir Kumar Bandyopadhyay and Shawni Dutta. 2020. Detection of fraud
transactions using recurrent neural network during COVID-19: fraud transaction
during COVID-19. Journal of Advanced Research in Medical Science & Technology
(ISSN: 2394-6539) 7, 3 (2020), 16–21.
[6] ABN AMRO Bank. 2019.
https://www.abnamro.com/nl/nieuws/meer-over-
financiele-criminaliteit
[7] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.
In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining. ACM, New York, NY, 785–794.
[8] Andrea Dal Pozzolo, Giacomo Boracchi, Olivier Caelen, Cesare Alippi, and Gian-
luca Bontempi. 2015. Credit card fraud detection and concept-drift adaptation
with delayed supervised information. In 2015 international joint conference on
Neural networks (IJCNN). IEEE, IEEE, iscataway, New Jersey, 1–8.
[9] Askhat Diveev and Elizaveta Shmalko. 2021. Machine learning control by symbolic
regression. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.
[10] Damien Garreau and Ulrike Luxburg. 2020. Explaining the explainer: A first
theoretical analysis of LIME. In International conference on artificial intelligence
and statistics. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 1287–1296.
[11] Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. 2017. European Union Regulations on Algo-
rithmic Decision-Making and a “Right to Explanation”. AI Magazine 38, 3 (oct
2017), 50–57. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741
[12] Petr Hajek, Mohammad Zoynul Abedin, and Uthayasankar Sivarajah. 2022. Fraud
Detection in Mobile Payment Systems using an XGBoost-based Framework.
Information Systems Frontiers 162 (2022), 1–19.
[13] Marianne Junger, Victoria Wang, and Marleen Schlömer. 2020. Fraud against
businesses both online and offline: Crime scripts, business characteristics, efforts,
and benefits. Crime science 9, 1 (2020), 13.
[14] Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Guillaume Lample, and François
Charton. 2022. End-to-end symbolic regression with transformers. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 10269–10281.
[15] Eunji Kim, Jehyuk Lee, Hunsik Shin, Hoseong Yang, Sungzoon Cho, Seung-kwan
Nam, Youngmi Song, Jeong-a Yoon, and Jong-il Kim. 2019. Champion-challenger
analysis for credit card fraud detection: Hybrid ensemble and deep learning.
Expert Systems with Applications 128 (2019), 214–224.
[16] John R. Koza. 1992. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by
Means of Natural Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[17] I Elizabeth Kumar, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Carlos Scheidegger, and Sorelle
Friedler. 2020. Problems with Shapley-value-based explanations as feature impor-
tance measures. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, Vienna,
Austria, 5491–5500.
[18] William La Cava, Patryk Orzechowski, Bogdan Burlacu, Fabricio Olivetti de
Franca, Marco Virgolin, Ying Jin, Michael Kommenda, and Jason H Moore. 2021.
Contemporary Symbolic Regression Methods and their Relative Performance. In
Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. PMLR, online.
[19] Mikel Landajuela, Chak Shing Lee, Jiachen Yang, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P Santiago,
Ignacio Aravena, Terrell Mundhenk, Garrett Mulcahy, and Brenden K Petersen.
2022. A unified framework for deep symbolic regression. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 33985–33998.
[20] Changliu Liu, Tomer Arnon, Christopher Lazarus, Christopher Strong, Clark
Barrett, Mykel J Kochenderfer, et al. 2021. Algorithms for verifying deep neural
networks. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization 4, 3-4 (2021), 244–404.
[21] Edgar Lopez-Rojas. 2017. Synthetic financial datasets for fraud detection, discus-
sion 99799. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ealaxi/paysim1/discussion/99799
[22] Edgar Lopez-Rojas, Ahmad Elmir, and Stefan Axelsson. 2016. PaySim: A financial
mobile money simulator for fraud detection. In 28th European Modeling and
Simulation Symposium, EMSS, Larnaca. 249–255.
[23] Pradip Mainali, Ismini Psychoula, and Fabien AP Petitcolas. 2022. ExMo: Ex
plainable AI Mo del Using Inverse Frequency Decision Rules. In International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 179–198.
[24] T. Nathan Mundhenk, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P. Santiago,
Daniel M. Faissol, and Brenden K. Petersen. 2021. Symbolic Regression via Neural-
Guided Genetic Programming Population Seeding. arXiv:2111.00053 [cs.NE]
[25] Anna Nesvijevskaia, Sophie Ouillade, Pauline Guilmin, and Jean-daniel Zucker.
2021. The accuracy versus interpretability trade-off in fraud detection model.
Data & Policy 3 (07 2021). https://doi.org/10.1017/dap.2021.3
[26] Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela Larma, Terrell N. Mundhenk, Claudio Prata
Santiago, Soo Kyung Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. 2021. Deep symbolic regression:
Recovering mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients.
In International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=m5Qsh0kBQG
[27] Pradheepan Raghavan and Neamat El Gayar. 2019. Fraud detection using machine
learning and deep learning. In 2019 international conference on computational
intelligence and knowledge economy (ICCIKE). IEEE, 334–339.
[28] Cynthia Rudin. 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for
high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature machine
intelligence 1, 5 (2019), 206–215.
[29] Wojciech Samek, Grégoire Montavon, Andrea Vedaldi, Lars Kai Hansen, and
Klaus-Robert Müller. 2019. Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing
Deep Learning (1st ed. 2019. ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham.
[30] Moshe Sipper. 2022. Binary and multinomial classification through evolutionary
symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference Companion. 300–303.
[31] Guido F. Smits and Mark Kotanchek. 2005. Pareto-Front Exploitation in Symbolic
Regression. Springer US, Boston, MA, 283–299. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-
23254-0_17
[32] Kush R. Varshney and Homa Alemzadeh. 2017. On the Safety of Machine Learning:
Cyber-Physical Systems, Decision Sciences, and Data Products. Big Data 3 (2017),
246–255.
[33] Giulia Vilone and Luca Longo. 2020. Explainable Artificial Intelligence: a Sys-
tematic Review. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2006.00093
[34] Rebecca Wexler. 2017. When a Computer Program Keeps you in jail. New York
Times IR (2017). http://lawcat.berkeley.edu/record/1136791
[35] Christopher Whitrow, David J Hand, Piotr Juszczak, David Weston, and Niall M
Adams. 2009. Transaction aggregation as a strategy for credit card fraud detection.
Data mining and knowledge discovery 18 (2009), 30–55.
[36] Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine Learning (1992), 5–32.

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
A
VISUALISATION OF SAMPLING EXPRESSIONS WITH DSR
Figure 3: An example of the sampling process of (Hybrid) Deep Symbolic Regression. Image is taken from the original DSR
paper by Petersen et al. [26]. (A) Elements are sampled from a categorical distribution emitted by the RNN on the library 𝐿
of elements, which is given in (B). The parent and sibling nodes of the next element are used as the next input to the RNN.
The sampling process ends when all branches reach the leaf nodes. The resulting list [÷, sin, ×,𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡,𝑥, log,𝑦] is the preorder
traversal of the syntax tree that represents the equation sin(𝑐𝑥)/log(𝑦). (C) The syntax tree that can be reconstructed from the
preorder traversal list from (A).
B
PREPROCESSING THE PAYSIM DATA SET
The following steps were taken into account to preprocess the data set:
• Certain transactions in the data set exhibited non-zero amounts, but had corresponding old and new balances of zero. To address this
scenario, we introduced the features externalOrig and externalDest for the customer and recipient accounts, respectively (please refer
to Table 4 for further details). Following this, we performed imputation of the balances according to the following relationships:
newbalanceDest = oldbalanceDest + amount
oldbalanceOrig = newbalanceOrig + amount
• Additional features were obtained through aggregation techniques in the data set. Descriptions of these features are given in Table 4.
• The features nameOrig, nameDest and isFlaggedFraud were discarded.
• The feature type was one-hot encoded.
• The data was randomly split into a training, validation, and test set which encompassed 75%, 10% and 15% of the data, respectively.
• A standard scaler was fitted on the numerical columns of the training set. Subsequently, the numerical columns of the training,
validation, and the test set were scaled using this fitted standard scaler.
• For some of the baseline models, an additional balanced training set was generated by randomly undersampling the training data.
Specifically, all fraudulent transactions were retained and an equal number of legitimate transactions was randomly selected to match
the count of fraudulent instances.
We here briefly describe and motivate some modeling decisions made in the experiments. In all experiments we aim to incorporate
aggregation features that encompass all previous transactions of both the customer and the recipient, providing insight into their overall
behavior patterns. The PaySim data set represents 30 days of transactions, which results in a major fraction of the account holders to
participate in a low number of transactions. As a consequence, aggregation features may not accurately describe the individual’s overall
behavior. To address this issue, we assume that subsequent transactions are independent from the current transaction: they primarily reflect
the individual’s general behavior and exhibit similar distributions as those observed in previous (yet unseen) months. Therefore, we include
future transactions as well in certain aggregation features. Thus, for each transaction, we add characteristics that show the mean and
maximum transaction amount over the entire data set of both the customer and recipient. This approach has a risk of data leakage, as earlier
transactions may contain information from subsequent time steps through the balance features. However, we argue that future transaction
information primarily reflects general user behavior and therefore does not constitute a form of data leakage. To reflect that these features
model overall customer behavior and reduce the risk of data leakage even further, we add a Gaussian noise to aggregation features that
contain future information.

Explainable Fraud Detection with Deep Symbolic Classification
XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Table 4: Descriptions of the additional features that were added to the data set
Feature
Description
externalOrig
Boolean variable that indicates whether the customer account is likely associated with an external institution,
an account is considered external if both oldbalanceOrig and oldbalanceOrig equal zero
externalDest
Boolean variable that indicates whether the recipient account is likely associated with an external institution,
an account is considered external if both oldbalanceDest and oldbalanceDest equal zero
meanOrig
mean value of all transaction amounts (excluding the current amount) associated with a particular customer,
with added Gaussian noise with 𝜇= 0 and 𝜎= 0.01 ∗(𝑞−𝑚) where 𝑞denotes the 0.75 quantile of the
customer’s transaction amounts and 𝑚represents the minimum transaction amount.
meanDest
mean value of all transaction amounts (excluding the current amount) associated with a particular recipient,
with added Gaussian noise with 𝜇= 0 and 𝜎= 0.01 ∗(𝑞−𝑚) where 𝑞denotes the 0.75 quantile of the
recipient’s transaction amounts and 𝑚represents the minimum transaction amount.
maxOrig
maximum value of all transaction amounts (excluding the current amount) associated with a particular customer,
with added Gaussian noise with 𝜇= 0 and 𝜎= 0.01 ∗(𝑞−𝑚) where 𝑞denotes the 0.75 quantile of the
customer’s transaction amounts and 𝑚represents the minimum transaction amount.
maxDest
maximum value of all transaction amounts (excluding the current amount) associated with a particular recipient,
with added Gaussian noise with 𝜇= 0 and 𝜎= 0.01 ∗(𝑞−𝑚) where 𝑞denotes the 0.75 quantile of the
recipient’s transaction amounts and 𝑚represents the minimum transaction amount.
meanDest3
mean of the last 3 transaction amounts (including the current amount) associated with a particular recipient
meanDest7
mean of the last 7 transaction amounts (including the current amount) associated with a particular recipient
maxDest3
maximum of the last 3 transaction amounts (including the current amount) associated with a particular recipient
maxDest7
maximum of the last 7 transaction amounts (including the current amount) associated with a particular recipient
numTransOrig
total number of transactions associated with a particular customer
numTransDest
total number of transactions associated with a particular recipient
C
BASELINE MODEL CONFIGURATION
The training set was randomly undersampled to achieve a balanced training set. Both the balanced training set and the original training set
were used to train the baseline models. Subsequently, these models were tested on an unbalanced test set. The parameters of the baseline
models are displayed in Table 5.
Table 5: Parameters of the baseline models
Model
Library
Parameters
𝑘-NN
scikit-learn
𝑘= 2
SVM
scikit-learn
complexity parameter C = 1, kernel function = polynomial, gamma = 0.01
RF
scikit-learn
number of trees = 200
XGBoost
XGBoost
booster = gbtree, eta = 0.3, gamma = 0, maximum depth of a tree = 3, sampling method = uniform,
lambda = 1, alpha = 0
D
DERIVATION OF DECISION RULE
The expression that resulted in the highest performance was:
𝑓=
√︁
externalDest + type_cash-out · (amount −maxDest7 + type_transfer),
(10)
where we have three Boolean features that either have value 0 or 1: externalDest, type_cash-out and type_transfer. The other features amount
and maxDest7 are numerical and positive. The decision rule is defined as:
ˆ𝑦= 1(fraud),
if 𝜎(𝑓) > 0.7,
as this expression was found by training DSC on a threshold 𝑡= 0.7. Rewriting the sigmoid 𝜎(𝑓) = (1 + 𝑒−𝑓)−1 gives us:
ˆ𝑦= 1(fraud),
if 𝑓> 0.85.

XAIFIN’23, November 27, 2023, New York City, NY
Visbeek, Acar and den Hengst
So for each transaction, 𝑓is calculated with the feature values of that transaction, and if 𝑓> 0.85, we classify that transaction as fraudulent.
It should be noted that
amount −maxDest7 ≤0,
(11)
since maxDest7 is the maximum of the last 7 transaction amounts (including the current amount) associated with a particular recipient.
Furthermore, we know that if type_transfer = 0, then it must be that type_cash-out = 1, and vice versa, since the feature type was one-hot
encoded. There are essentially two scenarios:
1. type_transfer = 0 and type_cash-out = 1. For explainability, let us divide expression 10 in two parts, such that 𝑓= 𝐴· 𝐵, where
𝐴=
√︁
externalDest + type_cash-out
𝐵= (amount −maxDest7 + type_transfer).
Given the inequality 11, we know that 𝐵must be smaller than or equal to 0. Since externalDest is a Boolean, which makes 𝐴positive, it fol-
lows that 𝑓≤0. Therefore, in the scenario where the transaction is of type cashout, the model will never classify the transaction as fraudulent.
2. type_transfer = 1 and type_cash-out = 0. For a transaction to be classified as fraudulent within this scenario, it is imperative that the
value of externalDest is equal to 1. Otherwise, 𝐴would evaluate to 0, resulting in the overall value of 𝑓being 0 due to multiplication with 0.
Now, let us assume that externalDest = 1, this would reduce equation 10 to: 𝑓= amount −maxDest7 + 1. Given that a transaction is
considered fraudulent only if 𝑓is greater than 0.85, it follows that amount −maxDest7 must be greater than -0.15.
We can now summarize our findings according to the following rules:
classify a transaction as fraudulent, if
• type = transfer, and
• externalDest = True, and
• amount - maxDest_7 > -0.15
classify a transaction as legitimate, otherwise
